conductor in a magnetic field (see Fig. 13.13). We find that the force
acting on arm AB pushes it downwards while the force acting on arm
CD pushes it upwards. Thus the coil and the axle O, mounted free to
turn about an axis, rotate anti-clockwise. At half rotation, Q makes
contact with the brush X and P with brush Y. Therefore the current in
the coil gets reversed and flows along the path DCBA. A device that
reverses the direction of flow of current through a circuit is called a
commutator. In electric motors, the split ring acts as a commutator. The
reversal of current also reverses the direction of force acting on the two
arms AB and CD. Thus the arm AB of the coil that was earlier pushed
down is now pushed up and the arm CD previously pushed up is now
pushed down. Therefore the coil and the axle rotate half.a turn more in
the same direction. The reversing of the current is repeated at each half
rotation, giving rise to a continuous rotation of the coil and to the axle.

The commercial motors use (i) an electromagnet in place of permanent
magnet; (ii) large number of turns of the conducting wire in the current-
carrying coil; and (iii) a soft iron core on which the coil is wound. The
soft iron core, on which the coil is wound, plus the coils, is called an
armature. This enhances the power of the motor.

State Fleming’s left-hand rule.

What is the principle of an electric motor?

What is the role of the split ring in an electric motor?

13.5 ELECTROMAGNETIC INDUCTION

We have studied that when a current-carrying conductor is placed ina
magnetic field such that the direction of current is perpendicular to the
magnetic field, it experiences a force. This force causes the conductor to
move. Now let us imagine a situation in which a conductor is moving
inside a magnetic field or a magnetic field is changing around a_fixed
conductor. What will happen? This was first studied by English physicist
Michael Faraday. In 1831, Faraday made an important breakthrough
by discovering how a moving magnet can be used to generate electric
currents. To observe this effect, let us perform the following activity.

Activity 13.8

Take a coil of wire AB having a large number of turns.

Connect the ends of the coil to a galvanometer as shown in
Fig. 13.16.

Take a strong bar magnet and move its north pole towards the
end B of the coil. Do you find any change in the galvuanometer
needle?

Magnetic Effects of Electric Current
