Q U ES TION S$

Judge the equivalent resistance when the following are connected in
parallel - (a) 1 Q and 10® Q, (b) 1 Q and 10° Q, and 108 Q.

An electric lamp of 100 Q, a toaster of resistance 50 Q, and a water filter
of resistance 500 Q are connected in parallel to a 220 V source. What is
the resistance of an electric iron connected to the same source that
takes as much current as all three appliances, and what is the current
through it?

What are the advantages of connecting electrical devices in parallel
with the battery instead of connecting them in series?

How can three resistors of resistances 2 Q, 3 Q, and 6 Q be connected to
give a total resistance of (a) 4 Q, (b) 1 Q?

What is (a) the highest, (b) the lowest total resistance that can be secured
by combinations of four coils of resistance 4 Q, 8 Q, 12 Q, 24 Q?

12.7 HEATING EFFECT OF ELECTRIC CURRENT

We know that a baitery or a cell is a source of electrical energy. The
chemical reaction within the cell generates the potential difference between
its two terminals that sets the electrons in motion to flow the current
through a resistor or a system of resistors connected to the battery. We
have also seen, in Section 12.2, that to maintain the current, the source
has to keep expending its energy. Where does this energy go? A part of
the source energy in maintaining the current may be consumed into
useful work (like in rotating the blades of an electric fan). Rest of the
source energy may be expended in heat to raise the temperature of
gadget. We often observe this in our everyday life. For example, an electric
fan becomes warm if used continuously for longer time etc. On the other
hand, ifthe electric circuit is purely resistive, that is, a configuration of
resistors only connected to a battery; the source energy continually gets
dissipated entirely in the form of heat. This is known as the heating
effect of electric current. This effect is utilised in devices such as electric
heater, electric iron ete.

Consider a current I flowing through a resistor of resistance R. Let
the potential difference across it be V(Fig. 12.13). Let tbe the time during
which a charge @ flows across. The work done in moving the charge Q
through a potential difference Vis VQ. Therefore, the source must supply
energy equal to VQ in time t. Hence the power input to the circuit by the
source is

pav2evi (12.19)

Or the energy supplied to the circuit by the source in time tis Px t,
that is, Vit. What happens to this energy expended by the source? This
energy gets dissipated in the resistor as heat. Thus for a steady
current J, the amount of heat H produced in time tis

H=VIt (12.20)

216 Science
