26

Check the pH of the water supplied to your house using universal
indicator or litmus paper.

Also check the pH of the water in the local water body (pond, river,
lake, stream).

Can you say whether the water is polluted or not on the basis of
your observations?

But we need not feel powerless or overwhelmed by the scale of the
problems because there are many things we can do to make a difference.
You must have come across the three R’s to save the environment: Reduce,
Recycle and Reuse. What do they refer to?

Reduce: This means that you use less. You save electricity by switching
off unnecessary lights and fans. You save water by repairing
leaky taps. You do not waste food. Can you think of other
things that you can reduce the usage of ?

Recycle: This means that you collect plastic, paper, glass and metal
items and recycle these materials to make required things
instead of synthesising or extracting fresh plastic, paper, glass
or metal. In order to recycle, we first need to segregate our
wastes so that the material that can be recycled is not dumped.
along with other wastes. Does your village/town/city have a
mechanism in place for recycling these materials?

Reuse: This is actually even better than recycling because the process
of recycling uses some energy. In the ‘reuse’ strategy, you
simply use things again and again. Instead of throwing away
used envelopes, you can reverse it and use it again. The plastic
bottles in which you buy various food-items like jam or pickle
can be used for storing things in the kitchen. What other items
can we reuse?

But even while making everyday choices, we can make environment-
friendly decisions. For doing this, we need to know more about how our
choices affect the environment, these effects may be immediate or long-
term or long-ranging. The concept of sustainable development
encourages forms of growth that meet current basic human needs, while
preserving the resources for the needs of future generations. Economic
development is linked to environmental conservation. Thus sustainable
development implies a change in all aspects of life. It depends upon the
willingness of the people to change their perceptions of the socio-economic
and environmental conditions around them, and the readiness of each
individual to alter their present use of natural resources.

Have you ever visited a town or village after a few years of absence?
If so, have you noticed new roads and houses that have come up
since you were there last? Where do you think the materials for
making these roads and buildings have come from?

Try and make a list of the materials and their probable sources.
Discuss the list you have prepared with your classmates. Can
you think of ways in which the use of these materials be reduced?

Science
