188

entering the eye. The eye lens forms an inverted real image of the object
on the retina. The retina is a delicate membrane having enormous
number of light-sensitive cells. The light-sensitive cells get activated
upon illumination and generate electrical signals. These signals are
sent to the brain via the optic nerves. The brain interprets these signals,
and finally, processes the information so that we perceive objects as

they are.

Damage to or malfunction of any part of the visual system can lead to significant loss
of visual functioning. For example, if any of the structures involved in the transmission
of light, like the cornea, pupil, eye lens, aqueous humour and vitreous humour or
those responsible for conversion of light to electrical impulse, like the retina or even
the optic nerve that transmits these impulses to the brain, is damaged, it will result
in visual impairment. You might have experienced that you are not able to see objects
clearly for some time when you enter from bright light to a room with dim light. After
sometime, however, you may be able to see things in the dim-lit room. The pupil of
an eye acts like a variable aperture whose size can be varied with the help of the iris.
When the light is very bright, the iris contracts the pupil to allow less light to enter
the eye. However, in dim light the iris expands the pupil to allow more light to enter
the eye. Thus, the pupil opens completely through the relaxation of the iris.

11.1.1 Power of Accommodation

The eye lens is composed of a fibrous, jelly-like material. Its curvature
can be modified to some extent by the ciliary muscles. The change in the
curvature of the eye lens can thus change its focal length. When the
muscles are relaxed, the lens becomes thin. Thus, its focal length
increases. This enables us to see distant objects clearly. When you are
looking at objects closer to the eye, the ciliary muscles contract. This
increases the curvature of the eye lens. The eye lens then becomes thicker.
Consequently, the focal length of the eye lens decreases. This enables
us to see nearby objects clearly.

The ability of the eye lens to adjust its focal length is called
accommodation. However, the focal length of the eye lens cannot be
decreased below a certain minimum limit. Try to read a printed page
by holding it very close to your eyes. You may see the image being blurred
or feel strain in the eye. To see an object comfortably and distinctly, you
must hold it at about 25 cm from the eyes. The minimum distance, at
which objects can be seen most distinctly without strain, is called the
least distance of distinct vision. It is also called the near point of the eye.
For a young adult with normal vision, the near point is about
25 cm. The farthest point upto which the eye can see objects clearly is
called the far point of the eye. It is infinity for a normal eye. You may
note here a normal eye can see objects clearly that are between 25 cm
and infinity.

Sometimes, the crystalline lens of people at old age becomes milky and
cloudy. This condition is called cataract. This causes partial or complete
loss of vision. It is possible to restore vision through a cataract surgery.

Science
