cells, or away from them and out into the air. The direction of diffusion
depends upon the environmental conditions and the requirements of
the plant. At night, when there is no photosynthesis occurring, CO,
elimination is the major exchange activity going on. During the day,
CO, generated during respiration is used up for photosynthesis, hence
there is no CO, release. Instead, oxygen release is the major event at
this time.

Animals have evolved different organs for the uptake of oxygen
from the environment and for getting rid of the carbon dioxide
produced. Terrestrial animals can breathe the oxygen in the
atmosphere, but animals that live in water need to use the oxygen
dissolved in water.

Observe fish in an aquarium. They open and close their mouths
and the gill-slits (or the operculum which covers the gill-slits)
behind their eyes also open and close. Are the timings of the
opening and closing of the mouth and gill-slits coordinated in some
manner?

Count the number of times the fish opens and closes its mouth in
a minute.

Compare this to the number of times you breathe in and out ina
minute.

Since the amount of dissolved oxygen is fairly low compared to the
amount of oxygen in the air, the rate of breathing in aquatic organisms
is much faster than that seen in terrestrial organisms. Fishes take in
water through their mouths and force it past the gills where the dissolved
oxygen is taken up by blood.

Terrestrial organisms use the oxygen in the atmosphere for
respiration. This oxygen is absorbed by different organs in different
animals. All these organs have a structure that increases the surface
area which is in contact with the oxygen-rich atmosphere. Since the
exchange of oxygen and carbon dioxide has to take place across this
surface, this surface is very fine and delicate. In order to protect this
surface, it is usually placed within the body, so there have to be passages
that will take air to this area. In addition, there is a mechanism for moving
the air in and out of this area where the oxygen is absorbed.

In human beings (Fig. 6.9), air is taken into the body through the
nostrils. The air passing through the nosirils is filtered by fine hairs that
line the passage. The passage is also lined with mucus which helps in
this process. From here, the air passes through the throat and into the
lungs. Rings of cartilage are present in the throat. These ensure that the
air-passage does not collapse.

Life Processes

103
