like in the lungs, is a cluster of very thin-walled blood
capillaries. Each capillary cluster in the kidney is
associated with the cup-shaped end of a tube that
collects the filtered urine (Fig. 6.14). Each kidney has
large numbers of these filtration units called nephrons
packed close together. Some substances in the initial
filtrate, such as glucose, amino acids, salts and a major
amount of water, are selectively re-absorbed as the
urine flows along the tube. The amount of water re-
absorbed depends on how much excess water there is
in the body, and on how much of dissolved waste there
is to be excreted. The urine forming in each kidney
eventually enters a long tube, the ureter, which
connects the kidneys with the urinary bladder. Urine
is stored in the urinary bladder until the pressure of
the expanded bladder leads to the urge to pass it out
through the urethra. The bladder is muscular, so it is
under nervous control, as we have discussed elsewhere.
As aresult, we can usually control the urge to urinate.

Glomerulus

Tubular part of
nephron

Branch of
renal vein

duct

4}
Figure 6.14
Structure of anephron

Artificial kidney (Hemodialysis)
Kidneys are vital organs for survival. Several factors like infections, injury or restricted
blood flow to kidneys reduce the activity of kidneys. This leads to accumulation of
poisonous wastes in the body, which can even lead to death. In case of kidney
failure, an artificial kidney can be used. An artificial kidney is a device to remove
nitrogenous waste products from the blood through dialysis.
Artificial kidneys contain a number of tubes with a semi-permeable lining, suspended

Line from artery
to pump Tubing made of a
selectively permeable

membrane

Line from
apparatus

Used dialysing
solution (with
urea and
excess salts)

dialysing
solution

Life Processes

in a tank filled with dialysing fluid.
This fluid has the same osmotic
pressure as blood, except that it is
devoid of nitrogenous wastes. The
patient’s blood is passed through
these tubes. During this passage,
the waste products from the blood
pass into dialysing fluid by diffusion.
The purified blood is pumped back
into the patient. This is similar to the
function of the kidney, but it is
different since there is no re-
absorption involved. Normally, ina
healthy adult, the initial filtrate in the
kidneys is about 180 L daily.
However, the volume actually
excreted is only a litre or two a day,
because the remaining filtrate is re-
absorbed in the kidney tubules.

+— Collecting

111
