After the above activity, would you be very surprised to learn that
regions of water scarcity are closely correlated to the regions of acute
poverty?

A study of rainfall patterns does not reveal the whole truth behind
the water availability in various regions in India. Rains in India are largely
due to the monsoons. This means that most of the rain falls in a few
months of the year. Despite nature’s monsoon bounty, failure to sustain
water availability underground has resulted largely from the loss of
vegetation cover, diversion for high water demanding crops, and pollution
from industrial effluents and urban wastes. Irrigation methods like dams,
tanks and canals have been used in various parts of India since ancient
times. These were generally local interventions managed by local people
and assured that the basic minimum requirements for both agriculture
and daily needs were met throughout the year. The use of this stored
water was strictly requlated and the optimum cropping patterns based
on the water availability were arrived at on the basis of decades /centuries
of experience, the maintenance of these irrigation systems was also a
local affair,

The arrival of the British changed these systems as it changed many
other things. The conception of large scale projects — large dams and
canals traversing large distances were first conceived and implemented
by the British and carried on with no less gusto by our newly formed
independent government. These mega-projects led to the neglect of the
local irrigation methods, and the government also increasingly took over
the administration of these systems leading to the loss of control over
the local water sources by the local people.

Kulths in Himachal Pradesh

Parts of Himachal Pradesh had evolved a local system of canal irrigation called kulhs
over four hundred years ago. The water flowing in the streams was diverted into
man-made channels which took this water to numerous villages down the hillside.
The management of the water flowing in these kulhs was by common agreement among
all the villages. Interestingly, during the planting season, water was first used by the
village farthest away from the source of the kuh, then by villages progressively higher
up. These kulhs were managed by two or three people who were paid by the villagers.
In addition to irrigation, water from these kulhs also percolated into the soil and fed
springs at various points. After the kulhs were taken over by the Irrigation Department,
most of them became defunct and there is no amicable sharing of water as before.

16.3.1 Dams

Why do we seek to build dams? Large dams can ensure the storage of
adequate water not just for irrigation, but also for generating electricity,
as discussed in the previous chapter. Canal systems leading from these
dams can transfer large amounts of water great distances. For example,
the Indira Gandhi Canal has brought greenery to considerable areas of
Rajasthan. However, mismanagement of the water has largely led to the
benefits being cornered by afew people. There is no equitable distribution

Science
