Imagine that you are holding a current-carrying straight
conductor in your right hand such that the thumb points towards
the direction of current. Then your fingers will wrap around the
Magnetic conductor in the direction of the field lines of the magnetic field, as

Field shown in Fig. 13.7. This is known as the right-hand thumb rule’.
current Example 13.1

Figure 13.7 A current through a horizontal power line flows in east to west

Right-hand thumb rule direction. What is the direction of magnetic field at a point directly

below it and at a point directly above it?

Solution

The current is in the east-west direction. Applying the right-hand
thumb rule, we get that the direction of magnetic field at a point
below the wire is from north to south. The direction of magnetic field
at a point directly above the wire is from south to north.

QUESTIONS

Draw magnetic field lines around a bar magnet.
List the properties of magnetic lines of force.

Why don’t two magnetic lines of force intersect each other?

13.2.3 Magnetic Field due to a Current through a
Circular Loop

We have so far observed the pattern of the magnetic field lines
produced around a current-carrying straight wire. Suppose
this straight wire is bent in the form of a circular loop and a
current is passed through it. How would the magnetic field
lines look like? We know that the magnetic field produced
by a current-carrying straight wire depends inversely on the
distance from it. Similarly at every point of a current-carrying
circular loop, the concentric circles representing the magnetic
field around it would become larger and larger as we move
away from the wire (Fig. 13.8). By the time we reach at the
centre of the circular loop, the arcs of these big circles would
Figure 13.8 appear as straight lines. Every point on the wire carrying
Magnetic field lines of the field current would give rise to the magnetic field appearing as
produced by a current-carrying straight lines at the center of the loop. By applying the right
circular loop hand rule, it is easy to check that every section of the wire
contributes to the magnetic field lines in the same direction
within the loop.

* This rule is also called Maxwell's corkscrew rute. If we consider ourselves driving a
corkscrew tn the direction of the current, then the direction of the corkscrew ts the
direction of the magnetic field.

Science
