that motion of electrons in an electric circuit constitutes an electric
current. The electrons, however, are not completely free to move within a
conductor. They are restrained by the attraction of the atoms among
which they move. Thus, motion of electrons through a conductor is
retarded by its resistance. A component of a given size that offers a low
resistance is a good conductor. A conductor having some appreciable
resistance is called a resistor. A component of identical size that offers a
higher resistance is a poor conductor. An insulator of the same size offers
even higher resistance.

12.5 FACTORS ON WHICH THE RESISTANCE OF A
CONDUCTOR DEPENDS

Complete an electric circuit consisting of a cell, an ammeter, a nichrome wire of length 1!
[say, marked (1)] and a plug key, as shown in Fig. 12.5.

Figure 12.5 Electric circuit to study the factors on which the resistance of conducting wires depends

206

Now, plug the key. Note the current in the ammeter.

Replace the nichrome wire by another nichrome wire of same thickness but twice the
length, that is 21 [marked (2) in the Fig. 12.5].

Note the ammeter reading.

Now replace the wire by a thicker nichrome wire, of the same length | [marked (3)]. A
thicker wire has a larger cross-sectional area. Again note down the current through the

Instead of taking a nichrome wire, connect a copper wire [marked (4) in Fig. 12.5] in the
circuit. Let the wire be of the same length and same area of cross-section as that of the
first nichrome wire [marked (1)}]. Note the value of the current.

Notice the difference in the current in all cases.

Does the current depend on the length of the conductor?

Does the current depend on the area of cross-section of the wire used?

It is observed that the ammeter reading decreases to one-half when
the length of the wire is doubled. The ammeter reading is increased when
a thicker wire of the same material and of the same length is used in the
circuit. A change in ammeter reading is observed when a wire of different
material of the same length and the same area of cross-section is used.
On applying Ohm’s law [Eqs. (12.5) — (12.7)], we observe that the

Science
