CHAPTER 5

Ss of Elements

Periodic Classification

n Class IX we have learnt that matter around us is present in the form
of elements, compounds and mixtures and the elements contain atoms
of only one type. Do you know how many elements are known till date?
At present, 114 elements are known to us. Around the year 1800, only
30 elements were known. All these had seemingly different properties.
As different elements were being discovered, scientists gathered more
and more information about the properties of these elements. They found
it difficult to organise all that was known about the elements. They started
looking for some pattern in their properties, on the basis of which they

could study such a large number of elements with ease.

5.1 MAKING ORDER OUT OF CHAOS - EARLY
ATTEMPTS AT THE CLASSIFICATION OF
ELEMENTS

We have been learning how various things or living beings can
be classified on the basis of their properties. Even in other
situations, we come across instances of organisation based
on some properties. For example, in a shop, soaps are kept
together at one place while biscuits are kept together elsewhere.
Even among soaps, bathing soaps are stacked separately from
washing soaps. Similarly, scientists made several attempts to
classify elements according to their properties and obtain an
orderly arrangement out of chaos.

The earliest attempt to classify the elements resulted in
grouping the then known elements as metals and non-metals.
Later further classifications were tried out as our knowledge
of elements and their properties increased.

5.1.1 Débereiner’s Triads
In the year 1817, Johann Wolfgang Débereiner, a German

Figure 5.1

Imagine you and your friends have
found pieces of an old map to reach
a treasure. Would it be easy or
chaotic to find the way to the
treasure? Similar chaos was there
in Chemistry as elements were
known but there was no clue as to
how to classify and study about them.

chemist, tried to arrange the elements with similar properties into groups.
He identified some groups having three elements each. So he called these
groups ‘triads’. Débereiner showed that when the three elements in a
