Figure 9.8
Homologous organs

152

Some basic characteristics will be shared by most organisms. The
cell is the basic unit of life in all organisms. The characteristics in the
next level of classification would be shared by most, but not all organisms.
Abasic characteristic of cell design that differs among different organisms
is whether the cell has a nucleus. Bacterial cells do not, while the cells of
most other organisms do. Among organisms with nucleated cells, which
ones are unicellular and which ones multi-cellular? That property marks
a very basic difference in body design, because of specialisation of cell
types and tissues. Among multi-cellular organisms, whether they can
undertake photosynthesis or not will provide the next level of
classification. Among the multi-cellular organisms that cannot do
photosynthesis, whether the skeleton is inside the body or around the
body will mark another fundamental design difference. We can see that,
even in these few questions that we have asked, a hierarchy is developing
that allows us to make classification groups.

The more characteristics two species will have in common, the more
closely they are related. And the more closely they are related, the more
recently they will have had a common ancestor. An example will help. A
brother and a sister are closely related. They have common ancestors in
the first generation before them, namely, their parents. A girl and her
first cousin are also related, but less than the girl and her brother. This
is because cousins have common ancestors, their grandparents, in the
second generation before them, not in the first one. We can now appreciate
that classification of species is in fact a reflection of their evolutionary
relationship.

We can thus build up small groups of species with recent common
ancestors, then super-groups of these groups with more distant common
ancestors, and so on. In theory, we can keep going backwards like this
until we come to the notion of a single species at the very beginning of
evolutionary time. If that is the case, then at some point in the history of
the earth, non-living material must have given rise to life. There are many
theories about how this might have happened. It would be interesting to
come up with theories of our own!

9.5.1 Tracing Evolutionary Relationships

When we try to follow evolutionary relationships, how do we identify
characteristics as common? These characteristics in different organisms
would be similar because they are inherited from a common ancestor.
As an example, consider the fact that mammals have four limbs, as do
birds, reptiles and amphibians (Fig. 9.8). The basic structure of the limbs
is similar though it has been modified to perform different functions in
various vertebrates. Such a homologous characteristic helps to identify
an evolutionary relationship between apparently different species.
However, all similarities simply in organ shape are not necessarily
because of common ancestry. What would we think about the wings of

Science
