As we can see, the Modern Periodic Table takes care of three
limitations of Mendléev’s Periodic Table. The anomalous position of
hydrogen can be discussed after we see what are the bases on which the
position of an element in the Modern Periodic Table depends.

5.3.1 Position of Elements in the Modern Periodic Table

The Modern Periodic Table has 18 vertical columns known as ‘groups’
and 7 horizontal rows known as ‘periods’. Let us see what decides the
placing of an element in a certain group and period.

Look at the group 1 of the Modern Periodic Table, and name the
elements present in it.

Write down the electronic configuration of the first three elements
of group 1.

What similarity do you find in their electronic configurations?
How many valence electrons are present in these three elements?

You will find that all these elements contain the same number of
valence electrons. Similarly, you will find that the elements present in
any one group have the same number of valence electrons. For example,
elements fluorine (F) and chlorine (Cl), belong to group 17, how many
electrons do fluorine and chlorine have in their outermost shells? Hence,
we can say that groups in the Periodic Table signify an identical outer-
shell electronic configuration. On the other hand, the number of shells
increases as we go down the group.

There is an anomaly when it comes to the position of hydrogen
because it can be placed either in group 1 or group 17 in the first period.
Can you say why?

If you look at the long form of the Periodic Table, you will find that
the elements Li, Be, B, C, N, O, F, and Ne are present in the second
period. Write down their electronic configuration.

Do these elements also contain the same number of valence
electrons?

Do they contain the same number of shells?

You will find that these elements do not have the same number of
valence electrons, but they contain the same number of shells. You also
observe that the number of valence shell electrons increases by one unit,
as the atomic number increases by one unit on moving from left to right
in a period.

Or we can say that atoms of different elements with the same number
of occupied shells are placed in the same period. Na, Mg, Al, Si, P, S, Cl
and Ar belong to the third period of the Modern Periodic Table, since the
electrons in the atoms of these elements are filled in K, Land M shells.
Write the electronic configuration of these elements and confirm the above
statement. Each period marks a new electronic shell getting filled.

Periodic Classification of Elements

87
