The New Cartesian Sign Convention described above is illustrated in
Fig. 10.9 for your reference. These sign conventions are applied to obtain
the mirror formula and solve related numerical problems.

10.2.4 Mirror Formula and Magnification

In a spherical mirror, the distance of the
object from its pole is called the object — Object on the left

M
distance (u). The distance of the image from Direction of
the pole of the mirror is called the image A incident light
distance (v). You already know that the
distance of the principal focus from the pole Height ;
d Distance towards :

is called the focal length (f). There is a (ve). * The leittve) Distance towards
relationship between these three quantities x
given by the mirror formula which is B B
expressed as

Height

downwards (-ve)

x

This formula is valid in all situations for all Mirror-—¥)
spherical mirrors for all positions of the N

object. You must use the New Cartesian Sign Figure 10.9
Convention while substituting numerical
values for u, v,_f, and R in the mirror formula
for solving problems.

Magnification

Magnification produced by a spherical mirror gives the relative extent to
which the image of an object is magnified with respect to the object size.
It is expressed as the ratio of the height of the image to the height of the
object. It is usually represented by the letter m.

If his the height of the object and h’is the height of the image, then
the magnification m produced by a spherical mirror is given by

The magnification m is also related to the object distance (u) and
image distance (v). It can be expressed as:

You may note that the height of the object is taken to be positive as
the object is usually placed above the principal axis. The height of the
image should be taken as positive for virtual images. However, it is to be
taken as negative for real images. A negative sign in the value of the
magnification indicates that the image is real. A positive sign in the value
of the magnification indicates that the image is virtual.

Light - Reflection and Refraction

The New Cartesian Sign Convention for spherical mirrors
