84

similar to Eka-boron, Eka-aluminium and Eka-silicon, respectively. The
properties of Eka-Aluminium predicted by Mendeléev and those of the
element, gallium which was discovered later and replaced Eka-
aluminium, are listed as follows (Table 5.5).

Table 5.5 Properties of eka-aluminium and gallium

Proreny TT stnint [ atom

Atomic Mass 69.7
Formula of Oxide BO. Ga,O,
Formula of Chloride ECl, GaCl,

This provided convincing evidence for both the correctness and
usefulness of Mendeléev’s Periodic Table. Further, it was the
extraordinary success of Mendeléev’s prediction that led chemists not
only to accept his Periodic Table but also recognise him, as the originator
of the concept on which it is based. Noble gases like helium (He), neon
(Ne) and argon (Ar) have been mentioned in many a context before this.
These gases were discovered very late because they are very inert and
present in extremely low concentrations in our atmosphere. One of the
strengths of Mendeléev’s Periodic Table was that, when these gases were
discovered, they could be placed in a new group without disturbing the
existing order.

5.2.2 Limitations of Mendeléev’s Classification

Electronie configuration of
hydrogen resembles that of alkali
metals. Like alkali metals,

hydrogen combines with HCl NaCl
halogens, oxygen and sulphur

to form compounds having H,0 Na,O
similar formulae, as shown in HS NaS

the examples here.

On the other hand, just like halogens, hydrogen also exists as
diatomic molecules and it combines with metals and non-metals to form
covalent compounds.

Activity 5.1

Looking at its resemblance to alkali metals and the halogen family,
try to assign hydrogen a correct position in Mendeléev’s Periodic Table.

To which group and period should hydrogen be assigned?

Certainly, no fixed position can be given to hydrogen in the Periodic
Table. This was the first limitation of Mendeléev’s Periodic Table. He
could not assign a correct position to hydrogen in his Table.

Isotopes were discovered long after Mendeléev had proposed his
periodic classification of elements. Let us recall that isotopes of an element
have similar chemical properties, but different atomic masses.

Science
