Figure 11.11

11.6.2 Why is the colour of the clear Sky Blue?

The molecules of air and other fine particles in the atmosphere have size
smaller than the wavelength of visible light. These are more effective in
scattering light of shorter wavelengths at the blue end than light of longer
wavelengths at the red end. The red light has a wavelength about 1.8
times greater than blue light. Thus, when sunlight passes through the
atmosphere, the fine particles in air scatter the blue colour (shorter
wavelengths) more strongly than red. The scattered blue light enters
our eyes. If the earth had no atmosphere, there would not have been
any scattering. Then, the sky would have looked dark. The sky appears
dark to passengers flying at very high altitudes, as scattering is not
prominent at such heights.

You might have observed that ‘danger’ signal lights are red in colour.
Do you know why? The red is least scattered by fog or smoke. Therefore,
it can be seen in the same colour at a distance.

11.6.3 Colour of the Sun at Sunrise and Sunset

Have you seen the sky and the Sun at sunset or sunrise? Have you
wondered as to why the Sun and the surrounding sky appear red? Let
us do an activity to understand the blue colour of the sky and the reddish
appearance of the Sun at the sunrise or sunset.

Place a strong source (S) of white light at the focus of a converging
lens (L,). This lens provides a parallel beam of light.

Allow the light beam to pass through a transparent glass tank (T)
containing clear water.

Allow the beam of light to pass through a circular hole (c) made in
a cardboard. Obtain a sharp image of the circular hole on a screen
(MN) using a second converging lens (L,), as shown in Fig. 11.11.
Dissolve about 200 g of sodium thiosulphate (hypo) in about 2 L of
clean water taken in the tank. Add about 1 to 2 mL of concentrated
sulphuric acid to the water. What do you observe?

You will find fine microscopic sulphur particles precipitating in about
2 to 3 minutes. As the sulphur particles begin to form, you can observe
the blue light from the three sides
of the glass tank. This is due to
scattering of short wavelengths by
minute colloidal sulphur
particles. Observe the colour of
the transmitted light from the
fourth side of the glass tank facing
the circular hole. It is interesting
to observe at first the orange red
colour and then bright crimson

An arrangement for observing scattering of light in colloidal solution red colour on the screen.

196

Science
