through it. Its SI unit is ohm, represented by the Greek letter Q. According
to Ohm’s law,

If the potential difference across the two ends of a conductor is 1 V
and the current through itis 1 A, then the resistance R, of the conductor

. _1volt _
is 1 Q. That is, 1 ohm = 1 ampere

Also from Eq. (12.5) we get

It is obvious from Eq. (12.7) that the current through a resistor is
inversely proportional to its resistance. If the resistance is doubled the
current gets halved. In many practical cases it is necessary to increase
or decrease the current in an electric circuit. A component used to
regulate current without changing the voltage source is called variable
resistance. In an electric circuit, a device called rheostat is often used to
change the resistance in the circuit. We will now study about electrical
resistance of a conductor with the help of following Activity.

Take a nichrome wire, a torch bulb, a 10 W bulb and an ammeter (0 - 5 A range), a plug

key and some connecting wires.

Set up the circuit by connecting four dry cells of 1.5 V each in series with the ammeter

leaving a gap XY in the circuit, as shown in Fig. 12.4.

+ =

T Nichrome wire

HHH-——

Figure 12.4

Complete the circuit by connecting the nichrome wire in the gap XY. Plug the key. Note
down the ammeter reading. Take out the key from the plug. [Note: Always take out the key

from the plug after measuring the current through the circuit.]

Replace the nichrome wire with the torch bulb in the circuit and find the current through

it by measuring the reading of the ammeter.
Now repeat the above step with the 10 W bulb in the gap XY.

Are the ammeter readings differ for different components connected in the gap XY? What

do the above observations indicate?

You may repeat this Activity by keeping any material component in the gap. Observe the

ammeter readings in each case. Analyse the observations.

In this Activity we observe that the current is different for different
components. Why do they differ? Certain components offer an easy path
for the flow of electric current while the others resist the flow. We know

Electricity

205
