happen between populations that are partly, but not completely
separated. If, however, between two such sub-populations a large river
comes into existence, the two populations will be further isolated. The
levels of gene flow between them will decrease even further.

Over generations, genetic drift will accumulate different changes in
each sub-population. Also, natural selection may also operate differently
in these different geographic locations. Thus, for example, in the territory
of one sub-population, crows are eliminated by eagles. But this does
not happen for the other sub-population, where crow numbers are very
high. As a result, the green variation will not be selected at the first site,
while it will be strongly selected at the second.

Together, the processes of genetic drift and natural selection will result
in these two isolated sub-populations of beetles becoming more and
more different from each other. Eventually, members of these two groups
will be incapable of reproducing with each other even if they happen to
meet.

There can be a number of ways by which this can happen. If the
DNA changes are severe enough, such as a change in the number of
chromosomes, eventually the germ cells of the two groups cannot fuse
with each other. Or a new variation emerges in which green females will
not mate with red males, but only with green males. This allows very
strong natural selection for greenness. Now, if such a green female beetle
meets a red male from the other group, her behaviour will ensure that
there is no reproduction between them. Effectively, new species of beetles
are being generated.

Q U ES TION S$

What factors could lead to the rise of a new species?

Will geographical isolation be a major factor in the speciation of a self-
pollinating plant species? Why or why not?

Will geographical isolation be a major factor in the speciation of an
organism that reproduces asexually? Why or why not?

9.5 EVOLUTION AND CLASSIFICATION

Based on these principles, we can work out the evolutionary relationships
of the species we see around us. It is a sort of going backwards in time.
We can do this by identifying hierarchies of characteristics between
species. In order to understand this process, let us think back to our
discussion on the classification of organisms in Class IX.

Similarities among organisms will allow us to group them and then
study the groups. For this, which characteristics decide more
fundamental differences among organisms, and which ones decide less
basic differences? What is meant by ‘characteristics’, anyway?
Characteristics are details of appearance or behaviour; in other words, a
particular form or a particular function. That we have four limbs is thus a
characteristic. That plants can do photosynthesis is also a characteristic.

Heredity and Evolution 151
