Q VU ES TION §

A ray of light travelling in air enters obliquely into water. Does the light
ray bend towards the normal or away from the normal? Why?

Light enters from air to glass having refractive index 1.50. What is the
speed of light in the glass? The speed of light in vacuum is 3 x 10° ms‘.

Find out, from Table 10.3, the medium having highest optical density.
Also find the medium with lowest optical density.

You are given kerosene, turpentine and water. In which of these does
the light travel fastest? Use the information given in Table 10.3.

The refractive index of diamond is 2.42. What is the meaning of this
statement?

10.3.3 Refraction by Spherical Lenses

You might have seen people using spectacles for reading. The
watchmakers use a small magnifying glass to see tiny parts. Have you
ever touched the surface of a magnifying glass with your hand? Is it
plane surface or curved? Is it thicker in the middle or at the edges? The
glasses used in spectacles and that by a watchmaker are examples of
lenses. What is a lens? How does it bend light rays? We shall discuss
these in this section.

A transparent material bound by two
surfaces, of which one or both surfaces are
spherical, forms a lens. This means that a lens is
bound by at least one spherical surface. In such
lenses, the other surface would be plane. A lens
may have two spherical surfaces, bulging
outwards. Such a lens is called a double convex
lens. It is simply called a convex lens. It is thicker
at the middle as compared to the edges.
) Convex lens converges light rays as shown in
Fig. 10.12 (a). Hence convex lenses are called
converging lenses. Similarly, a double concave
lens is bounded by two spherical surfaces,

oF, , curved inwards. It is thicker at the edges than at
the middle. Such lenses diverge light rays as
> shown in Fig. 10.12 (b). Such lenses are called
diverging lenses. A double concave lens is simply
called a concave lens.
Figure 10.12 Alens, either a convex lens or a concave lens,

(a) Converging action of a convex lens, (b) diverging has two spherical surfaces. Each of these surfaces
action of a concave lens orms a part of a sphere. The centres of these
spheres are called centres of curvature of the lens.

The centre of curvature of a lens is usually represented by the letter C.

Since there are two centres of curvature, we may represent them as C,

and C,. An imaginary straight line passing through the two centres of

176 Science
