needs or development projects like building roads or dams. The damage
caused in these reserves by tourists or the arrangements made for their
convenience is also to be considered.

We need to accept that human intervention has been very much a
part of the forest landscape. What has to be managed in the nature and
extent of this intervention. Forest resources ought to be used in a manner
that is both environmentally and developmentally sound — in other words,
while the environment is preserved, the benefits of the controlled
exploitation go to the local people, a process in which decentralised
economic growth and ecological conservation go hand in hand. The kind
of economic and social development we want will ultimately determine
whether the environment will be conserved or further destroyed. The
environment must not be regarded as a pristine collection of plants and
animals. It is a vast and complex entity that offers a range of natural
resources for our use. We need to use these resources with due caution
for our economic and social growth, and to meet our material aspirations.

16.2.2 Sustainable Management

We need to consider if the goals of all the above stakeholders with regard
to the management of the forests are the same. Forest resources are
often made available for industrial use at rates far below the market
value while these are denied to the local people. The Chipko Andolan
(Hug the Trees Movement’) was the result of a grassroot level effort to
end the alienation of people from their forests. The movement originated
rom an incident in a remote village called Reni in Garhwal, high-up in
the Himalayas during the early 1970s. There was a dispute between the
local villagers and a logging contractor who had been allowed to fell
trees in a forest close to the village. On a particular day, the contractor’s
workers appeared in the forest to cut the trees while the men folk were
absent. Undeterred, the women of the village reached the forest quickly
and clasped the tree trunks thus preventing the workers from felling the
trees. Thus thwarted, the contractor had to withdraw.

Inherent in such a competition to control a natural resource is the
conservation of a replenishable resource. Specifically the method of use
was being called into question. The contractor would have felled the
trees, destroying them forever. The communities traditionally lop the
branches and pluck the leaves, allowing the resource to replenish over
time. The Chipko movement quickly spread across communities and
media, and_ forced the government, to whom the forest belongs, to rethink
their priorities in the use of forest produce. Experience has taught people
that the destruction of forests affected not just the availability of forest
products, but also the quality of soil and the sources of water.
Participation of the local people can indeed lead to the efficient
management of forests.

An Example of People’s Participation in the Management of Forests
In 1972, the West Bengal Forest Department recognised its failures in
reviving the degraded Sal forests in the southwestern districts of the
state. Traditional methods of surveillance and policing had led to a

Science
