6.5.2 Excretion in Plants

Plants use completely different strategies for excretion than those of
animals. Oxygen itself can be thought of as a waste product generated
during photosynthesis! We have discussed earlier how plants deal with
oxygen as well as CO,. They can get rid of excess water by transpiration.
For other wastes, plants use the fact that many of their tissues consist of
dead cells, and that they can even lose some parts such as leaves. Many
plant waste products are stored in cellular vacuoles. Waste products
may be stored in leaves that fall off. Other waste products are stored as
resins and gums, especially in old xylem. Plants also excrete some waste
substances into the soil around them.

Q U ES TION S$

= Movement of various types can be taken as an indication of life.

= The maintenance of life requires processes like nutrition, respiration, transport of
materials within the body and excretion of waste products.

=  Autotrophic nutrition involves the intake of simple inorganic materials from the
environment and using an external energy source like the Sun to synthesise complex
high-energy organic material.

=  Heterotrophic nutrition involves the intake of complex material prepared by other
organisms.

= In human beings, the food eaten is broken down by various steps along the
alimentary canal and the digested food is absorbed in the small intestine to be sent
to all cells in the body.

= During the process of respiration, complex organic compounds such as glucose
are broken down to provide energy in the form of ATP. ATP is used to provide
energy for other reactions in the cell.

= Respiration may be aerobic or anaerobic. Aerobic respiration makes more energy
available to the organism.

= Inhuman beings, the transport of materials such as oxygen, carbon dioxide, food
and excretory products is a function of the circulatory system. The circulatory
system consists of the heart, blood and blood vessels.

= Inhighly differentiated plants, transport of water, minerals, food and other materials
is a function of the vascular tissue which consists of xylem and phloem.

112 Science
