(see Fig. 13.15). Thus a unidirectional current is produced. The generator
is thus called a DC generator.

The difference between the direct and alternating currents is that the
direct current always flows in one direction, whereas the alternating
current reverses its direction periodically. Most power stations
constructed these days produce AC. In India, the AC changes direction
after every 1/100 second, that is, the frequency of AC is 50 Hz. An
important advantage of AC over DC is that electric power can be
transmitted over long distances without much loss of energy.

Q U ES TION ยง

State the principle of an electric generator.
Name some sources of direct current.
Which sources produce alternating current?

Choose the correct option.

A rectangular coil of copper wires is rotated in a magnetic field. The
direction of the induced current changes once in each

(a) two revolutions (b) one revolution

(c) half revolution (d) one-fourth revolution

13.7 DOMESTIC ELECTRIC CIRCUITS

In our homes, we receive supply of electric power through a main supply
(also called mains), either supported through overhead electric poles or
by underground cables. One of the wires in this supply, usually with
red insulation cover, is called live wire (or positive). Another wire, with
black insulation, is called neutral wire (or negative). In our country, the
potential difference between the two is 220 V.

At the metre-board in the house, these wires pass into an electricity
meter through a main fuse. Through the main switch they are connected
to the line wires in the house. These wires supply electricity to separate
circuits within the house. Often, two separate circuits are used, one of
15 A current rating for appliances with higher power ratings such as
geysers, air coolers, etc. The other circuit is of 5 A current rating for
bulbs, fans, etc. The earth wire, which has insulation of green colour, is
usually connected to a metal plate deep in the earth near the house.
This is used as a safety measure, especially for those appliances that
have a metallic body, for example, electric press, toaster, table fan,
refrigerator, etc. The metallic body is connected to the earth wire, which
provides a low-resistance conducting path for the current. Thus, it
ensures that any leakage of current to the metallic body of the appliance
keeps its potential to that of the earth, and the user may not get a severe
electric shock.

Magnetic Effects of Electric Current
