82

The main credit for classifying elements goes to Dmitri Ivanovich
Mendeléev, a Russian chemist. He was the most important contributor
to the early development of a Periodic Table of elements wherein the
elements were arranged on the basis of their fundamental property, the
atomic mass, and also on the similarity of chemical properties.

Dmitri Ivanovich Mendeléev was
born in Tobolsk in Western Siberia,
Russia on 8 February 1834. After
his early education, Mendeléev
could join a university only due to
the efforts of his mother. Dedicating
his investigations to his mother he
wrote, “She instructed with
example, corrected with love and
travelled with me to places
spending her last resources and
strength. She knew that with the
aid of science without violence, with love but firmness, all
superstitions, untruth and errors can be removed.” The
arrangement of elements he proposed is called Mendeléev’s
Periodic Table. The Periodic Table proved to be the unifying
principle in chemistry. It was the motivation for the discovery of
some new elements.

When Mendeléev started his work, 63 elements were known. He
examined the relationship between the atomic masses of the elements
and their physical and chemical properties. Among chemical properties,
Mendeléev concentrated on the compounds formed by elements with
oxygen and hydrogen. He selected hydrogen and oxygen as they are
very reactive and formed compounds with most elements. The formulae
of the hydrides and oxides formed by an element were treated as one of
the basic properties of an element for its classification. He then took 63
cards and on each card he wrote down the properties of one element. He
sorted out the elements with similar properties and pinned the cards
together on a wall. He observed that most of the elements got a place in
a Periodic Table and were arranged in the order of their increasing atomic
masses. It was also observed that there occurs a periodic recurrence of
elements with similar physical and chemical properties. On this basis,
Mendeléev formulated a Periodic Law, which states that ‘the properties
of elements are the periodic function of their atomic masses’.

Mendeléev’s Periodic Table contains vertical columns called ‘groups’
and horizontal rows called ‘periods’ (Table 5.4).

Science
