16.1 WHY DO WE NEED TO MANAGE OUR RESOURCES?

Not just roads and buildings, but all the things we use or consume-
food, clothes, books, toys, furniture, tools and vehicles — are obtained
from resources on this earth. The only thing we get_from outside is energy
which we receive from the Sun. Even this energy is processed by living
organisms and various physical and chemical processes on the earth
before we make use of it.

Why do we need to use our resources carefully? Because these are
not unlimited and with the human population increasing at a
tremendous rate due to improvement in health-care, the demand for all
resources is increasing at an exponential rate. The management of
natural resources requires a long-term perspective so that these will
last for the generations to come and will not merely be exploited to the
hilt for short term gains. This management should also ensure equitable
distribution of resources so that all, and not just a handful of rich and
powerful people, benefit from the development of these resources.

Another factor to be considered while we exploit these natural
resources is the damage we cause to the environment while these
resources are either extracted or used. For example, mining causes
pollution because of the large amount of slag which is discarded for
every tonne of metal extracted. Hence, sustainable natural resource
management demands that we plan for the safe disposal of these
wastes too.

Q U ES TION §

What changes can you make in your habits to become more environment-
friendly?

What would be the advantages of exploiting resources with short-term
aims?

How would these advantages differ from the advantages of using a long-
term perspective in managing our resources?

Why do you think there should be equitable distribution of resources?
What forces would be working against an equitable distribution of our
resources?

16.2 FORESTS AND WILD LIFE

Forests are ‘biodiversity hot spots’. One measure of the biodiversity of
an area is the number of species found there. However, the range of
different life forms (bacteria, fungi, ferns, flowering plants, nematodes,
insects, birds, reptiles and so on) is also important. One of the main
aims of conservation is to try and preserve the biodiversity we have
inherited. Experiments and field studies suggest that a loss of diversity
may lead to a loss of ecological stability.

Management of Natural Resources 26
