Dobereiner’s triads

Table 5.2
Li Ca
Na Sr
K Ba

80

Cl

Br

I

triad were written in the order of increasing atomic masses; the atomic
mass of the middle element was roughly the average of the atomic masses
of the other two elements.

For example, take the triad consisting of lithium (Li), sodium (Na)
and potassium (K) with the respective atomic masses 6.9, 23.0 and 39.0.
What is the average of the atomic masses of Li and K? How does this
compare with the atomic mass of Na?

Given below (Table 5.1) are some groups of three elements. These
elements are arranged downwards in order of increasing atomic masses.
Can you find out which of these groups form Débereiner triads?

Table 5.1

Group A | Atomic Group B_ | Atomic Group C | Atomic
element mass element mass elements mass
N Ca Cl

14.0 40.1 35. 5
P 31.0 Sr 87.6 Br 79.9
As 74.9 Ba 137.3 I 126.9

You will find that groups B and C form Débereiner triads. Débereiner
could identify only three triads from the elements known at that time
(Table 5.2). Hence, this system of classification into triads was not found
to be useful.

Johann Wolfgang Débereiner studied as a
pharmacist at Mtinchberg in Germany, and then
studied chemistry at Strasbourg. Eventually he
became a professor of chemistry and pharmacy
at the University of Jena. Débereiner made the
first observations on platinum as a catalyst and
discovered similar triads of elements which led to
the development of the Periodic Table of elements.

5.1.2 Newlands’ Law of Octaves

The attempts of Débereiner encouraged other chemists to correlate the
properties of elements with their atomic masses. In 1866, John Newlands,
an English scientist, arranged the then known elements in the order of
increasing atomic masses. He started with the element having the lowest
atomic mass (hydrogen) and ended at thorium which was the 56"
element. He found that every eighth element had properties similar to
that of the first. He compared this to the octaves found in music.
Therefore, he called it the ‘Law of Octaves’. It is known as ‘Newlands’
Law of Octaves’. In Newlands’ Octaves, the properties of lithium and
sodium were found to be the same. Sodium is the eighth element after
lithium. Similarly, beryllium and magnesium resemble each other. A
part of the original form of Newlands’ Octaves is given in Table 5.3.

Science
