9.3.2 Acquired and Inherited Traits

We discussed the idea that the germ cells of sexually reproducing
populations are made in specialised reproductive tissue. Ifthe weight of
the beetle is reduced because of starvation, that will not change the DNA
of the germ cells. Therefore, low weight is not a trait that can be inherited
by the progeny of a starving beetle. Therefore, even if some generations
of beetles are low in weight because of starvation, that is not an example
of evolution, since the change is not inherited over generations. Change
in non-reproductive tissues cannot be passed on to the DNA of the germ
cells. Therefore the experiences of an individual during its lifetime cannot
be passed on to its progeny, and cannot direct evolution.

Consider another example of how an individual cannot pass on to
its progeny the experiences ofits lifetime. Ifwe breed a group of mice, all
their progeny will have tails, as expected. Now, if the tails of these mice
are removed by surgery in each generation, do these tailless mice have
tailless progeny? The answer is no, and it makes sense because removal
of the tail cannot change the genes of the germ cells of the mice.

Charles Darwin set out on a voyage when he was 22 years old. The
five-year voyage took him to South America and the islands offits coast.
The studies that he conducted during this voyage were to change forever
the way we look at the variety of life on earth. Interestingly, after he got
back to England, he never left its shores again. He stayed at home and
conducted various experiments that led him to formulate his hypothesis
that evolution took place due to natural selection. He did not know the
mechanism whereby variations arose in the species. He would have
been enlightened by Mendel’s experiments, but these two gentlemen
did not know of each other or their work!

We often associate Darwin solely with the theory of evolution. But he was an accomplished
naturalist, and one of the studies he conducted was to do with the role of earthworms in

soil fertility.

This is the reason why the ideas of heredity and genetics that we

have discussed earlier are so essential for understanding evolution. Even
Charles Darwin, who came up with the idea of evolution of species by
natural selection in the nineteenth century, could not work out the
mechanism. It is ironic that he could have done so if he had seen the
significance of the experiments his Austrian contemporary, Gregor
Mendel, was doing. But then, Mendel too did not notice Darwin’s work
as relevant to his!

Origin of life on earth

Darwin’s theory of evolution tells us how life evolved from simple to more complex forms
and Mendel’s experiments give us the mechanism for the inheritance of traits from one
generation to the next. But neither tells us anything about how life began on earth in the

first place.

Heredity and Evolution

149
