Another interesting aspect of food chain is how unknowingly some
harmful chemicals enter our bodies through the food chain. You have
read in Class IX how water gets polluted. One of the reasons is the use of
several pesticides and other chemicals to protect our crops from diseases
and pests. These chemicals are either washed down into the soil or into
the water bodies. From the soil, these are absorbed by the plants along
with water and minerals, and from the water bodies these are taken up
by aquatic plants and animals. This is one of the ways in which they
enter the food chain. As these chemicals are not degradable, these get
accumulated progressively at each trophic level. As human beings occupy
the top level in any food chain, the maximum concentration of these
chemicals get accumulated in our bodies. This phenomenon is known
as biological magnification. This is the reason why our food grains such
as wheat and rice, vegetables and fruits, and even meat, contain varying
amounts of pesticide residues. They cannot always be removed by
washing or other means.

Activity 15.5

Newspaper reports about pesticide levels in ready-made food items
are often seen these days and some states have banned these
products. Debate in groups the need for such bans.

What do you think would be the source of pesticides in these food
items? Could pesticides get into our bodies from this source through
other food products too?

Discuss what methods could be applied to reduce our intake of
pesticides.

Q U ES TION S

What are trophic levels? Give an example of a food chain and state the
different trophic levels in it.

What is the role of decomposers in the ecosystem?

15.3 HOW DO OUR ACTIVITIES AFFECT THE
ENVIRONMENT?

We are an integral part of the environment. Changes in the environment
affect us and our activities change the environment around us. We have
already seen in Class IX how our activities pollute the environment. In
this chapter, we shall be looking at two of the environmental problems
in detail, that is, depletion of the ozone layer and waste disposal.

Our Environment 261
