While creating an aquarium did you take care not to put an aquatic
animal which would eat others? What would have happened

otherwise?

Make groups and discuss how each of the above groups of

organisms are dependent on each other.

Write the aquatic organisms in order of who eats whom and form

a chain of at least three steps. > >

Would you consider any one group of organisms to be of primary

importance? Why or why not?

15.2.1 Food Chains and Webs

In Activity 15.4 we have formed a series of organisms feeding
on one another. This series or organisms taking part at various
biotic levels form a food chain (Fig. 15.1).

Each step or level of the food chain forms a trophic level.
The autotrophs or the producers are at the first trophic level.
They fix up the solar energy and make it available for
heterotrophs or the consumers. The herbivores or the primary
consumers come at the second, small carnivores or the
secondary consumers at the third and larger carnivores or
the tertiary consumers form the fourth trophic level (Fig. 15.2).

We know that the food we eat acts as a fuel to provide us
energy to do work. Thus the interactions among various
components of the environment involves flow of energy from
one component of the system to another. As we have studied,
the autotrophs capture the energy present in sunlight and
convert it into chemical energy. This energy supports all the
activities of the living world. From autotrophs, the energy goes
to the heterotrophs and decomposers. However, as we saw in
the previous Chapter on ‘Sources of Energy’, when one form
of energy is changed to another, some energy is lost to the
environment in forms which cannot be used again. The flow
of energy between various components of the environment
has been extensively studied and it has been found that —

= The green plants in a terrestrial ecosystem capture about
1% of the energy of sunlight that falls on their leaves and

convert it into food energy.

= When green plants are eaten by primary consumers, a great
deal of energy is lost as heat to the environment, some amount
goes into digestion and in doing work and the rest goes
towards growth and reproduction. An average of 10% of the
food eaten is turned into its own body and made available for

the next level of consumers.

= Therefore, 10% can be taken as the average value for the
amount of organic matter that is present at each step and

reaches the next level of consumers.

Our Environment

Figure 15.1

Food chain in nature
(@ tn forest, (b) in
grassland and (co) ina
pond

Tertiary
consumers

Secondary
consumers
Primary consumers
Producers

Figure 15.2
Trophic levels

