Activity 5.2

Consider the isotopes of chlorine, Cl-35 and C1-37.

Would you place them in different slots because their atomic
masses are different?

Or would you place them in the same position because their
chemical properties are the same?

Thus, isotopes of all elements posed a challenge to Mendeleev’s
Periodic Law. Another problem was that the atomic masses do not increase
in a regular manner in going from one element to the next. So it was not
possible to predict how many elements could be discovered between
two elements — especially when we consider the heavier elements.

Q U ES TION $

Use Mendeléev’s Periodic Table to predict the formulae for the oxides of
the following elements:

K, C, AI, Si, Ba.

Besides gallium, which other elements have since been discovered that
were left by Mendeléev in his Periodic Table? (any two)

What were the criteria used by Mendeléev in creating his Periodic Table?

Why do you think the noble gases are placed in a separate group?

5.3 MAKING ORDER OUT OF CHAOS - THE MODERN
PERIODIC TABLE

In 1913, Henry Moseley showed that the atomic number of an element
is amore fundamental property than its atomic mass as described below.
Accordingly, Mendeléev’s Periodic Law was modified and atomic number
was adopted as the basis of Modern Periodic Table and the Modern
Periodic Law can be stated as follows:

‘Properties of elements are a periodic function of their atomic number.’

Let us recall that the atomic number gives us the number of protons
in the nucleus of an atom and this number increases by one in going
from one element to the next. Elements, when arranged in order of
increasing atomic number Z, lead us to the classification known as the
Modern Periodic Table (Table 5.6). Prediction of properties of elements
could be made with more precision when elements were arranged on
the basis of increasing atomic number.

Activity 5.3

How were the positions of cobalt and nickel resolved in the Modern Periodic Table?

How were the positions of isotopes of various elements decided in the Modern Periodic Table?
Is it possible to have an element with atomic number 1.5 placed between hydrogen
and helium?

Where do you think should hydrogen be placed in the Moder Periodic Table?

Periodic Classification of Elements 85
