9.5.3 Evolution by Stages

A question that arises here is — if complicated organs,
such as the eye, are selected for the advantage they
provide, how can they be generated by a single DNA
change? Surely such complex organs will be created
bit-by-bit over generations? But how can each
intermediate change be selected for? There are a
number of possible explanations. Even an
intermediate stage (Fig. 9.11), such as a rudimentary
eye, can be useful to some extent. This might be
enough to give a fiiness advantage. In fact, the eye —
like the wing — seems to be a very popular adaptation.
Insects have them, so does an octopus, and so do
vertebrates. And the structure of the eye in each of
these organisms is different - enough for them to have
separate evolutionary origins.

Also, a change that is useful for one property to
start with can become useful later for quite a different
function. Feathers, for example, can start out as
providing insulation in cold weather (Fig. 9.12). But
later, they might become useful for flight. In fact,
some dinosaurs had feathers, although they could
not fly using the feathers. Birds seem to have later
adapted the feathers to flight. This, of course, means
that birds are very closely related to reptiles, since
dinosaurs were reptiles!

It is all very well to say that very dissimilar-
looking structures evolve from a common ancestral
design. It is true that analysis of the organ structure
in fossils allows us to make estimates of how far back
evolutionary relationships go. But those are guesses
about what happened in history. Are there any
current examples of such a process? The wild
cabbage plant is a good example. Humans have, over
more than two thousand years, cultivated wild
cabbage as a food plant, and generated different
vegetables from it by selection (see Fig. 9.13). This is,
of course, artificial selection rather than natural
selection. So some farmers have wanted to select for
very short distances between leaves, and have bred
the cabbage we eat. Some have wanted to select for
arrested flower development, and have bred broccoli,

Figure 9.11

A flatworm named Planaria has very simple
‘eyes’ that are really just eye-spots which
detect light.

This is a small
dinosaur from
the Dromaesaur
family.

Feather imprints were
preserved along this dinosaur's
bones. Here we can see feathers
on the forearm.

Here's a close-up of the fossil's head feathers.

This dinosaur could not fly, and it is possible that the
evolution of feathers had nothing to do with flight.

Figure 9.12
Dinosaurs and the evolution of feathers

or for sterile flowers, and have made the cauliflower. Some have selected
for swollen parts, and come up with kohlrabi. Some have simply looked
for slightly larger leaves, and come up with a leafy vegetable called kale.
Would we have thought that all these structures are descended from the

same ancestor if we had not done it ourselves?

Heredity and Evolution

155
