local people — leaves for fodder, herbs for medicines, fruits and nuts for
food — can no longer be met from such forests. Such plantations are
useful for the industries to access specific products and are an important
source of revenue for the Forest Department.

Do you know how many industries are based on forest produce? A
short count reveals timber, paper, lac and sports equipment.

Find out about any two forest produce that are the basis for an
industry.

Discuss whether this industry is sustainable in the long run. Or
do we need to control our consumption of these products?

Industries would consider the forest as merely a source of raw
material for its factories. And huge interest-groups lobby the government
Jor access to these raw materials at artificially low rates. Since these
industries have a greater reach than the local people, they are not
interested in the sustainability of the forest in one particular area. For
example, after cutting down all the teak trees in one area, they will get
their teak from a forest farther away. They do not have any stake in
ensuring that one particular area should yield on optimal amount of
some produce for all generations to come. What do you think will stop
the local people in behaving in a similar manner?

Lastly, we come to the nature and wildlife enthusiasts who are in no
way dependent on the forests, but who may have considerable say in
their management. The conservationists were initially taken up with large
animals like lions, tigers, elephants and rhinoceros. They now recognise
the need to preserve biodiversity as a whole. But shouldn’t we recognise
people as forming part of the forest system? There have been enough
instances of local people working traditionally for conservation of forests.
For example, the case of the Bishnoi community in Rajasthan, for whom
conservation of forest and wildlife has been a religious tenet. The
Government of India has recently instituted an ‘Amrita Devi Bishnoi
National Award for Wildlife Conservation’ in the memory of Amrita Devi
Bishnoi, who in 1731 sacrificed her life along with 363 others for the
protection of ‘khejri’ trees in Khejrali village near Jodhpur in Rajasthan.

Studies have shown that the prejudice against the traditional use of
forest areas has no basis. Here is an example — the great Himalayan
National Park contains, within its reserved area, alpine meadows which
were grazed by sheep in summer. Nomadic shepherds drove their flock
up from the valleys every summer. When this national park was formed,
this practice was put to an end. Now it is seen that without the regular
grazing by sheep the grass first grows very tall, and then falls over
preventing fresh growth.

Management of protected areas, by keeping the local people out, by
using force cannot possibly be successful in the long run. In any case, the
damage caused to forests cannot be attributed to only the local people —
one cannot turn a blind eye to the deforestation caused by industrial

Management of Natural Resources
