large number of goods upon which our lives depend. These energy needs
have been largely met by the reserves of coal and petroleum.

The management of these energy sources involves slightly different
perspectives from those resources discussed earlier. Coal and petroleum
were formed from the degradation of bio-mass millions of years ago and
hence these are resources that will be exhausted in the future no matter
how carefully we use them. And then we would need to look for alternative
sources of energy. Various estimates as to how long these resources will
last us exist and one is that at present rates of usage, our known
petroleum resources will last us for about forty years and the coal
resources will last for another two hundred years.

But looking to other sources of energy is not the only consideration
when we look at the consumption of coal and petroleum. Since coal and
petroleum have been formed from bio—mass, in addition to carbon, these
contain hydrogen, nitrogen and sulphur. When these are burnt, the
products are carbon dioxide, water, oxides of nitrogen and oxides of
sulphur. When combustion takes place in insufficient air (oxygen), then
carbon monoxide is formed instead of carbon dioxide. Of these products,
the oxides of sulphur and nitrogen and carbon monoxide are poisonous
at high concentrations and carbon dioxide is a green-house gas. Another
way of looking at coal and petroleum is that they are huge reservoirs of
carbon and if all of this carbon is converted to carbon dioxide, then the
amount of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere is going to increase leading
to intense global warming. Thus, we need to use these resources
judiciously.

Coal is used in thermal power stations and petroleum products
like petrol and diesel are used in means of transport like motor
vehicles, ships and aeroplanes. We cannot really imagine life
without a number of electrical appliances and constant use of
transportation. So can you think of ways in which our consumption
of coal and petroleum products be reduced?

Some simple choices can make a difference in our energy consumption
patterns. Think over the relative advantages, disadvantages and
environment-friendliness of the following —

(i) Taking a bus, using your personal vehicle or walking /cycling.

(ii) Using bulbs or fluorescent tubes in your homes.

(iii) Using the lift or taking the stairs.
fix) Wearing an extra sweater or using a heating device (heater or
‘sigri’) on cold days.

The management of coal and petroleum also addresses the efficiency
of our machines. Fuel is most commonly used in internal combustion
engines for transportation and recent research in this field concentrates
on ensuring complete combustion in these engines in order to increase
efficiency and also reduce air pollution.

Management of Natural Resources
