1

This activity demonstrates the scattering of Se sun nearly
light that helps you to understand the bluish O

colour of the sky and the reddish appearance of

the Sun at the sunrise or the sunset.

os — overhead

. . Blue scattered away Less blue
Light from the Sun near the horizon passes Sun appears reddish scattered
through thicker layers of air and larger distance Ql
in the earth’s atmosphere before reaching oureyes — sun near a
(Fig. 11.12). horizon ="! Observer

However, light from the Sun overhead would
travel relatively shorter distance. At noon, the Sun
appears white as only a little of the blue andviolet Figure 11.12
colours are scattered. Near the horizon, most of | Reddening of the Sun at sunrise and sunset
the blue light and shorter wavelengths are
scattered away by the particles. Therefore, the light that reaches our
eyes is of longer wavelengths. This gives rise to the reddish appearance
of the Sun.

The ability of the eye to focus both near and distant objects, by adjusting its focal
length, is called the accommodation of the eye.

The smallest distance, at which the eye can see objects clearly without strain, is
called the near point of the eye or the least distance of distinct vision. For a young
adult with normal vision, it is about 25 em.

The common refractive defects of vision include myopia, hypermetropia and
presbyopia. Myopia (short-sightedness — the image of distant objects is focussed
before the retina) is corrected by using a concave lens of suitable power.
Hypermetropia (far-sightedness — the image of nearby objects is focussed beyond
the retina) is corrected by using a convex lens of suitable power. The eye loses its
power of accommodation at old age.

The splitting of white light into its component colours is called dispersion.

Scattering of light causes the blue colour of sky and the reddening of the Sun at
sunrise and sunset.

1. The human eye can focus objects at different distances by adjusting the focal
length of the eye lens. This is due to

(a) presbyopia.

(b) accommodation.
(c) mnear-sightedness.
(d)  far-sightedness.

The Human Eye and the Colourful World 197
