Table 5.3 Newlands’ Octaves

H Li Be B C N O

F Na Mg Al Si P SS)
Cl K Ca Cr Ti Mn Fe
Co and Ni Cu Zn Y In As Se

Are you familiar with musical notes?

In the Indian system of music, there are seven musical notes in a scale — sa, re, ga, ma, pa,
da, ni. In the west, they use the notations — do, re, mi, fa, so, la, ti: The notes in a scale are
separated by whole and half-step frequency intervals of tones and semitones. A musician
uses these notes for composing the music of a song. Naturally, there must be some repetition
ofnotes. Every eighth note is similar to the first one and it is the first note of the next scale.

Do You Know?

It was found that the Law of Octaves was applicable only upto
calcium, as after calcium every eighth element did not possess
properties similar to that of the first.
= Itwas assumed by Newlands that only 56 elements existed in nature
and no more elements would be discovered in the future. But, later
on, several new elements were discovered, whose properties did not
fit into the Law of Octaves.
= Inorder to fit elements into his Table, Newlands adjusted two elements
in the same slot, but also put some unlike elements under the same
note. Can you find examples of these from Table 5.3? Note that cobalt
and nickel are in the same slot and these are placed in the same
column as fluorine, chlorine and bromine which have very different
properties than these elements. Iron, which resembles cobalt and
nickel in properties, has been placed far away from these elements.

Thus, Newlands’ Law of Octaves worked well with lighter elements only.

Q U ES TION $

Did Débereiner’s triads also exist in the columns of Newlands’ Octaves?

Compare and find out.

What were the limitations of Débereiner’s classification?
What were the limitations of Newlands’ Law of Octaves?

5.2 MAKING ORDER OUT OF CHAOS — MENDELEEV’S
PERIODIC TABLE

Even after the rejection of Newlands’ Law of Octaves, many scientists
continued to search for a pattern that correlated the properties of elements
with their atomic masses.

Periodic Classification of Elements 81
