of water, thus people close to the source grow water intensive crops like
sugarcane and rice while people farther downstream do not get any water.
The woes of these people who have been promised benefits which never
arrived are added to the discontentment among the people who have
been displaced by the building of the dam and its canal network.

In the previous chapter, we mentioned the reasons for opposition to
the construction of large dams, such as the Tehri Dam on the river Ganga.
You must have read about the protests by the Narmada Bachao Andolan
(‘Save the Narmada Movement’) about raising the height of the Sardar
Sarovar Dam on the river Narmada. Criticisms about large dams address
three problems in particular —

(i) Social problems because they displace large number of peasants

and tribals without adequate compensation or rehabilitation,

(ii) Economic problems because they swallow up huge amounts of

public money without the generation of proportionate benefits,
(iii) Environmental problems because they contribute enormously
to deforestation and the loss of biological diversity.

The people who have been displaced by various development projects
are largely poor tribals who do not get any benefits from these projects
and are alienated from their lands and forests without adequate
compensation. The oustees of the Tawa Dam built in the 1970s are still

fighting for the benefits they were promised.

16.3.2 Water Harvesting

Watershed management emphasises scientific soil and water
conservation in order to increase the biomass production. The aim is to
develop primary resources of land and water, to produce secondary
resources of plants and animals for use in a manner which will not cause
ecological imbalance. Watershed management not only increases the
production and income of the watershed community, but also mitigates
droughts and floods and increases the life of the downstream dam and
reservoirs. Various organisations have been working on rejuvenating
ancient systems of water harvesting as an alternative to the ‘mega-projects’
like dams. These communities have used hundreds of indigenous water
saving methods to capture every trickle of water that had fallen on their
land; dug small pits and lakes, put in place simple watershed systems,
built small earthen dams, constructed dykes, sand and limestone
reservoirs, set up rooftop water-collecting units. This has recharged
groundwater levels and even brought rivers back to life.

Water harvesting is an age-old concept in India. Khadins, tanks
and nadis in Rajasthan, bandharas and tals in Maharashtra, bundhis
in Madhya Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh, ahars and pynes in Bihar,
kulhs in Himachal Pradesh, ponds in the Kandi belt of Jammu region,
and eris (tanks) in Tamil Nadu, surangams in Kerala, and kattas in
Kamataka are some of the ancient water harvesting, including water
conveyance, structures still in use today (see Fig. 16.3 for an
example). Water harvesting techniques are highly locale specific and
the benefits are also localised. Giving people control over their local
water resources ensures that mismanagement and over-exploitation
of these resources is reduced /removed.

Management of Natural Resources
