148

progeny beetles are green. Crows cannot see green-coloured beetles on
the green leaves of the bushes, and therefore cannot eat them. What
happens then? The progeny of green beetles is not eaten, while the
progeny of red beetles continues to be eaten. As a result, there are more
and more green beetles than red ones in the beetle population.

In a second situation, again, a colour variation arises during
reproduction, but now it results in a beetle that is blue in colour instead
of red. This beetle can also pass the colour on to its progeny, so that all
its progeny beetles are blue. Crows can see blue-coloured beetles in the
green leaves of the bushes as well as they can see red ones, and therefore
can eat them. What happens initially? In the population, as it expands,
there are a few blue beetles, but most are red. But at this point, an
elephant comes by, and stamps on the bushes where the beetles live.
This kills most of the beetles. By chance, the few beetles that have survived
are mostly blue. The beetle population slowly expands again, but now,
the beetles in the population are mostly blue.

It is obvious that in both situations, what started out as a rare variation
came to be a common characteristic in the population. In other words,
the frequency of an inherited trait changed over generations. Since genes
control traits, we can say that the frequency of certain genes in a
population changed over generations. This is the essence of the idea of
evolution.

But there are interesting differences, too, in the two situations. In the
first case, the variation became common because it gave a survival
advantage. In other words, it was naturally selected. We can see that the
natural selection is exerted by the crows. The more crows there are, the
more red beetles would be eaten, and the more the proportion of green
beetles in the population would be. Thus, natural selection is directing
evolution in the beetle population. It results in adaptations in the beetle
population to fit their environment better.

In the second situation, the colour change gave no survival advantage.
Instead, it was simply a matter of accidental survival of beetles of one
colour that changed the common characteristic of the resultant
population. The elephant would not have caused such major havoc in
the beetle population if the beetle population had been very large. So,
accidents in small populations can change the frequency of some genes
in a population, even if they give no survival advantage. This is the notion
of genetic drift, which provides diversity without any adaptations.

Now consider a third situation. In this, as the beetle population begins
to expand, the bushes start suffering from a plant disease. The amount
of leaf material for the beetles is reduced. The beetles are poorly nourished
as a result. The average weight of adult beetles decreases from what it
used to be when leaves were plentiful, but there is no genetic change
occurring. After a few years and a few beetle generations of such scarcity,
the plant disease is eliminated. There is a lot of leaf food. At this time,
what would we expect the weight of the beetles to be?

Science
