You will see that the atomic radius decreases in moving from left to
right along a period. This is due to an increase in nuclear charge which
tends to pull the electrons closer to the nucleus and reduces the size of
the atom.

Study the variation in the atomic radii of first group elements
given below and arrange them in an increasing order.

Group 1 Elements : Na _ Li Rb Cs K

Atomic Radius (pm) : 86 152 244 262 231

Name the elements which have the smallest and the largest atoms.
How does the atomic size vary as you go down a group?

You will see that the atomic size increases down the group. This is
because new shells are being added as we go down the group. This
increases the distance between the outermost electrons and the nucleus
so that the atomic size increases in spite of the increase in nuclear charge.

Metallic and Non-metallic Properties

Examine elements of the third period and classify them as metals
and non-metals.

On which side of the Periodic Table do you find the metals?

On which side of the Periodic Table do you find the non-metals?

As we can see, the metals like Na and Mg are towards the left-hand
side of the Periodic Table while the non-metals like sulphur and chlorine
are found on the right-hand side. In the middle, we have silicon, which
is classified as a semi-metal or metalloid because it exhibits some
properties of both metals and non-metals.

In the Modern Periodic Table, a zig-zag line separates metals from
non-metals. The borderline elements — boron, silicon, germanium,
arsenic, antimony, tellurium and polonium - are intermediate in
properties and are called metalloids or semi-metals.

As you have seen in Chapter 3, metals tend to lose electrons while
forming bonds, that is, they are electropositive in nature.

How do you think the tendency to lose electrons will change in a
group?
How will this tendency change in a period?

As the effective nuclear charge acting on the valence shell electrons

increases across a period, the tendency to lose electrons will decrease.
Down the group, the effective nuclear charge experienced by valence

Periodic Classification of Elements 89
