on. While the residents spread across Africa, the migrants slowly spread
across the planet — from Africa to West Asia, then to Central Asia, Eurasia,
South Asia, East Asia. They travelled down the islands of Indonesia and
the Philippines to Australia, and they crossed the Bering land bridge to
the Americas. They did not go in a single line, so they were not travelling
for the sake of travelling, obviously. They went forwards and backwards,
with groups sometimes separating from each other, sometimes coming
back to mix with each other, even moving in and out of Africa. Like all
other species on the planet, they had come into being as an accident of
evolution, and were trying to live their lives the best they could.

Q U ES TION $

Variations arising during the process of reproduction can be inherited.
These variations may lead to increased survival of the individuals.

Sexually reproducing individuals have two copies of genes for the same trait. If the
copies are not identical, the trait that gets expressed is called the dominant trait
and the other is called the recessive trait.

= ‘Traits in one individual may be inherited separately, giving rise to new combinations
of traits in the offspring of sexual reproduction.

= Sexis determined by different factors in various species. In human beings, the sex
of the child depends on whether the paternal chromosome is X (for girls) or Y (for

boys).

= Variations in the species may confer survival advantages or merely contribute to
the genetic drift.

= Changes in the non-reproductive tissues caused by environmental factors are not
inheritable.

= Speciation may take place when variation is combined with geographical isolation.
= Evolutionary relationships are traced in the classification of organisms.

= Tracing common ancestors back in time leads us to the idea that at some point of
time, non-living material must have given rise to life.

= Evolution can be worked out by the study of not just living species, but also fossils.

= Complex organs may have evolved because of the survival advantage of even the
intermediate stages.

= Organs or features may be adapted to new functions during the course of evolution.
For example, feathers are thought to have been initially evolved for warmth and
later adapted for flight.

158 Science
