Q U ES TION S$

If we look around us, what can we identify as the most important reason(s) for poor, living
tandards?
How is the process of pollination different from fertilisation?
What is the role of the seminal vesicles and the prostate gland?
What are the changes seen in girls at the time of puberty?

How does the embryo get nourishment inside the mother’s body?

If a woman is using a copper-T, will it help in protecting her from
sexually transmitted diseases?

Reproduction, unlike other life processes, is not essential to maintain the life of an
individual organism.

Reproduction involves creation of a DNA copy and additional cellular apparatus
by the cell involved in the process.

Various organisms use different modes of reproduction depending on their body
design.

In fission, many bacteria and protozoa simply divide into two or more daughter
cells.

Organisms such as hydra can regenerate if they are broken into pieces. They can
also give out buds which mature into new individuals.

Roots, stems and leaves of some plants develop into new plants through vegetative
propagation.

These are examples of asexual reproduction where new generations are created
from a single individual.

Sexual reproduction involves two individuals for the creation of a new individual.

DNA copying mechanisms creates variations which are useful for ensuring the
survival of the species. Modes of sexual reproduction allow for greater variation to
be generated.

Reproduction in flowering plants involves transfer of pollen grains from the anther
to the stigma which is referred to as pollination. This is followed by fertilisation.
Changes in the body at puberty, such as increase in breast size in girls and new
facial hair growth in boys, are signs of sexual maturation.

The male reproductive system in human beings consists of testes which produce
sperms, vas deferens, seminal vesicles, prostate gland, urethra and penis.

The female reproductive system in human beings consists of ovaries, fallopian
tubes, uterus and vagina.

Sexual reproduction in human beings involves the introduction of sperm in the

14 Science
