Why do we have two eyes for vision and not just one?
There are several advantages of our having two eyes instead of one. It gives a wider
field of view. A human being has a horizontal field of view of about 150° with one eye
and of about 180° with two eyes. The ability to detect faint objects is, of course,
enhanced with two detectors instead of one.
Some animals, usually prey animals, have their two eyes positioned on opposite sides

of their heads to give the widest possible field of view. But our two eyes are positioned
on the front of our heads, and it thus reduces our field of view in favour of what is
called stereopsis. Shut one eye and the world looks flat — two-dimensional. Keep both
eyes open and the world takes on the third dimension of depth. Because our eyes
are separated by a few centimetres, each eye sees a slightly different image. Our
brain combines the two images into one, using the extra information to tell us how
close or far away things are.

11.2 DEFECTS OF VISION AND THEIR CORRECTION

Sometimes, the eye may gradually lose its power of accommodation.
In such conditions, the person cannot see the objects distinctly and
comfortably. The vision becomes blurred due to the refractive defects
of the eye.

There are mainly three common refractive defects of vision. These
are (i) myopia or near-sightedness, (ii) Hypermetropia or far-
sightedness, and (iii) Presbyopia. These defects can be corrected by
the use of suitable spherical lenses. We discuss below these defects
and their correction.

(a) Myopia

Myopia is also known as near-sightedness. A person with myopia
can see nearby objects clearly but
cannot see distant objects distinctly.

A person with this defect has the far
point nearer than infinity. Such a
person may see clearly upto a
distance of a few metres. In a myopic

eye, the image of a distant object is
formed in front of the retina Oo!
[Fig. 11.2 (b)] and not at the retina a
itself. This defect may arise due to

(i) excessive curvature of the eye

lens, or (ii) elongation of the eyeball.

This defect can be corrected by pees
using a concave lens of suitable TTT 7 SW" S==SS=llo_oe
power. This is illustrated in
Fig. 11.2 (c). A concave lens of
suitable power will bringtheimage — Figure 11.2

back on to the retina and thus the (a), (b) The myopic eye, and (c) correction for myopia with a
defect is corrected. concave lens

(a) Far point of a myopic eye

(b) Myopic Eye

(c) Correction for myopia

The Human Eye and the Colourful World 189
