birds and bats, for example (Fig. 9.9)? Birds
and bats have wings, but squirrels and
lizards do not. So are birds and bats more
closely related to each other than to squirrels
or lizards?

Before we jump to this conclusion, let us

look at the wings of birds and bats more Figure 9.9

closely. When we do that, we find that the Analogous organs — The wing of a bat and the

wings of bats are skin folds stretched mainly wing of a bird

between elongated fingers. But the wings of

birds are a feathery covering all along the arm. The designs of the two
wings, their structure and components, are thus very different. They
look similar because they have a common use for flying, but their origins
are not common. This makes them analogous characteristics, rather
than homologous characteristics. It would now be interesting to think
about whether bird arms and bat arms should be considered homologous
or analogous!

9.5.2 Fossils

Such studies of organ structure can be done not only on current species,
but also on species that are no longer alive. How do we know that these
extinct species ever existed? We know this from finding fossils (Fig. 9.10).
What are fossils? Usually, when organisms die, their bodies will
decompose and be lost. But every once in a while, the body or at least
some parts may be in an environment that does not let it decompose
completely. Ifa dead insect gets caught in hot mud, for example, it will
not decompose quickly, and the mud will eventually harden and retain
the impression of the body parts of the insect. All such preserved traces
of living organisms are called fossils.

Zi .
i Ne
ou. | | P\

Fossil - tree trunk Fossil — invertebrate
(Ammonite)

Fossil - invertebrate
(Trilobite)

Fossil - fish (Knightia) Fossil - dinosaur skull

(Rajasaurus)

Figure 9.10 Various kind of fossils. Note the different appearances and degrees of detail and preservation.
The dinosaur skull fossil shown was found only a few years ago in the Narmada valley.

Heredity and Evolution

153
