‘Flow’ of charges inside a wire
How does a metal conduct electricity? You would think that a low-energy electron
would have great difficulty passing through a solid conductor. Inside the solid, the
atoms are packed together with very little spacing between them. But it turns out
that the electrons are able to ‘travel’ through a perfect solid crystal smoothly and
easily, almost as if they were in a vacuum. The ‘motion’ of electrons in a conductor,
however, is very different from that of charges in empty space. When a steady current
flows through a conductor, the electrons in it move with a certain average ‘drift speed’.
One can calculate this drift speed of electrons for a typical copper wire carrying a
small current, and it is found to be actually very small, of the order of 1 mm s*. How
is it then that an electric bulb lights up as soon as we turn the switch on? It cannot be
that a current starts only when an electron from one terminal of the electric supply
physically reaches the other terminal through the bulb, because the physical drift of
electrons in the conducting wires is a very slow process. The exact mechanism of the
current flow, which takes place with a speed close to the speed of light, is fascinating,
but it is beyond the scope of this book. Do you feel like probing this question at an

advanced level?

12.2 ELECTRIC POTENTIAL AND POTENTIAL DIFFERENCE

What makes the electric charge to flow? Let us consider the analogy of
flow of water. Charges do not flow in a copper wire by themselves, just as
water in a perfectly horizontal tube does not flow. If one end of the tube
is connected to a tank of water kept at a higher level, such that there is a
pressure difference between the two ends of the tube, water flows out of
the other end of the tube. For flow of charges in a conducting metallic
wire, the gravity, of course, has no role to play; the electrons move only
if there is a difference of electric pressure — called the potential difference —
along the conductor. This difference of potential may be produced by a
battery, consisting of one or more electric cells. The chemical action within
a cell generates the potential difference across the terminals of the cell,
even when no current is drawn from it. When the cell is connected to a
conducting circuit element, the potential difference sets the charges in
motion in the conductor and produces an electric current. In order to
maintain the current in a given electric circuit, the cell has to expend its
chemical energy stored in it.

We define the electric potential difference between two points in an
electric circuit carrying some current as the work done to move a unit
charge from one point to the other —

Potential difference (V) between two points = Work done (W)/Charge (Q)

The SI unit of electric potential difference is volt (V), named after
Alessandro Volta (1745-1827), an Italian physicist. One volt is the

Electricity

201
