Let us now perform a variation of Activity 13.8 in which the moving
magnet is replaced by a current-carrying coil and the current in the coil
can be varied.

Take two different coils of copper wire having
large number of turns (say 50 and 100 turns
respectively). Insert them over a non-conducting
cylindrical roll, as shown in Fig. 13.17. (You may
use a thick paper roll for this purpose.)
Connect the coil-1, having larger number of
turns, in series with a battery and a plug key.
Also connect the other coil-2 with a
galvanometer as shown.

Plug in the key. Observe the galvanometer. Is
there a deflection in its needle? You will observe
that the needle of the galuanometer instantly
jumps to one side and just as quickly returns to
zero, indicating a momentary current in coil-2.
Disconnect coil-1 from the battery. You will
observe that the needle momentarily moves, but

Coil-1

to the opposite side. It means that now the Figure 13.17

Coil-2

current flows in the opposite direction in coil-2. Current ts induced in coil-2 when current
in cotl-I ts changed

In this activity we observe that as soon as the current in coil-1 reaches
either a steady value or zero, the galvuanometer in coil-2 shows no
deflection.

From these observations, we conclude that a potential difference is
induced in the coil-2 whenever the electric current through the coil-1
is changing (starting or stopping). Coil-1 is called the primary coil and
coil-2 is called the secondary coil. As the current in the first coil changes,
the magnetic field associated with it also changes. Thus the magnetic
field lines around the secondary coil also change. Hence the change in
magnetic field lines associated with the secondary coil is the cause of
induced electric current in it. This process, by which a changing
magnetic field in a conductor induces a current in another conductor,
is called electromagnetic induction. In practice we can induce current
in a coil either by moving it in a magnetic field or by changing the
magnetic field around it. It is convenient in most situations to move
the coil in a magnetic field.

The induced current is found to be the highest when
the direction of motion of the coil is at right angles to the
magnetic field. In this situation, we can use a simple rule
to know the direction of the induced current. Stretch the
thumb, forefinger and middle finger of right hand so that C

‘urrent
they are perpendicular to each other, as shown in induced
Fig. 13.18. If the forefinger indicates the direction of the in conductor
magnetic field and the thumb shows the direction of motion
of conductor, then the middle finger will show the direction
of induced current. This simple rule is called Fleming’s
right-hand rule.

Magnetic Effects of Electric Current

Magnetic field

Movement of
conductor

Motion
Field
Induced current

Figure 13.18
Fleming's right-hand rule
