There is a momentary deflection in the needle of
the galvanometer, say to the right. This indicates
the presence of a current in the coil AB. The
deflection becomes zero the moment the motion
of the magnet stops.

Now withdraw the north pole of the magnet away
from the coil. Now the galuanometer is deflected
toward the left, showing that the current is now
set up in the direction opposite to the first.
Place the magnet stationary at a point near to
the coil, keeping its north pole towards the end
B of the coil. We see that the galuanometer needle
deflects toward the right when the coil is moved
towards the north pole of the magnet. Similarly
the needle moves toward left when the coil is
moved away.

When the coil is kept stationary with respect to
the magnet, the deflection of the galuanometer
drops to zero. What do you conclude from this
activity?

Figure 13.16

Moving a magnet towards a coil sets up a
current in the coil circuit, as indicated by
deflection in the galvanometer needle.

A galvanometer is an instrument that can detect
the presence of a current in a circuit. The pointer
remains at zero (the centre of the scale) for zero
current flowing through it. It can deflect either
to the left or to the right of the zero mark
depending on the direction of current.

You can also check that if you had moved south pole of the magnet
towards the end B of the coil, the deflections in the galuanometer would
just be opposite to the previous case. When the coil and the magnet are
both stationary, there is no deflection in the galvuanometer. It is, thus,
clear from this activity that motion of a magnet with respect to the coil
produces an induced potential difference, which sets up an induced
electric current in the circuit.

Michael Faraday was an experimental physicist. He had no formal
education. He worked in a book-binding shop during his early years.
He used to read books that came for binding. This way Faraday
developed his interest in science. He got an opportunity to listen to
some public lectures by Humphrey Davy of Royal Institute. He made
careful notes of Davy’s lectures and sent them to Davy. Soon he was
made an assistant in Davy’s laboratory at the Royal Institute. Faraday
made several path-breaking discoveries that include electromagnetic
induction and the laws of electrolysis. Several universities conferred
on him the honorary degrees but he turned down such honours. Faraday loved his
science work more than any honour.

4 Science
