Figure 16.2
A view of a forest life

16.2.1 Stakeholders
Activity 16.5

Make a list of forest produce that you use.

What do you think a person living near a forest would use?
What do you think a person living in a forest would use?
Discuss with your classmates how these needs differ or do not
differ and the reasons for the same.

We all use various forest produce. But our dependency on forest
resources varies. Some of us have access to alternatives, some do not.
When we consider the conservation of forests, we need to look at the
stakeholders who are —

fi) the people who live in or around forests are dependent on forest

produce for various aspects of their life (see Fig. 16.2).

(ii) the Forest Department of the Government which owns the land

and controls the resources from forests.

(iii) the industrialists — from those who use ‘tendu’ leaves to make
bidis to the ones with paper mills — who use various forest produce,
but are not dependent on the forests in any one area.

(iv) the wild life and nature enthusiasts who want to conserve nature
in its pristine form.

Let us take a look at what each of these groups
needs/gets out of the forests. The local people
need large quantities of firewood, small timber
and thatch. Bamboo is used to make slats for huts,
and baskets for collecting and storing food
materials. Implements for agriculture, fishing and
hunting are largely made of wood, also forests
are sites for fishing and hunting. In addition to
people gathering fruits, nuts and medicines from
the forests, their cattle also graze in forest areas
or feed on other fodder which is collected from
forests.

Do you think such use of forest resources would lead to the
exhaustion of these resources? Do not forget that before the British came
and took over most of our forest areas, people had been living in these
forests for centuries. They had developed practices to ensure that the
resources were used in a sustainable manner. After the British took
control of the forests (which they exploited ruthlessly for their own
purposes), these people were forced to depend on much smaller areas
and forest resources started becoming over-exploited to some extent.
The Forest Department in independent India took over from the British
but local knowledge and local needs continued to be ignored in the
management practices. Thus vast tracts of forests have been converted
to monocultures of pine, teak or eucalyptus. In order to plant these
trees, huge areas are first cleared of all vegetation. This destroys a large
amount of biodiversity in the area. Not only this, the varied needs of the

Science
