every stage of this process. So it is not as if one species is eliminated to
give rise to a new one. A new species has emerged. But that does not
necessarily mean, like the beetle example we have been thinking about,
that the old species will disappear. It will all depend on the environment.
Also, it is not as if the newly generated species are in any way ‘better’
than the older one. It is just that natural selection and genetic drift have
together led to the formation of a population that cannot reproduce with
the original one. So, for example, it is not true that human beings have
evolved from chimpanzees. Rather, both human beings and chimpanzees
have a common ancestor a long time ago. That common ancestor is likely
to have been neither human or chimpanzee. Also, the first step of
separation from that ancestor is unlikely to have resulted in modern
chimpanzees and human beings. Instead, the two resultant species have
probably evolved in their own separate ways to give rise to the current
forms.

In fact, there is no real ‘progress’ in the idea of evolution. Evolution is
simply the generation of diversity and the shaping of the diversity by
environmental selection. The only progressive trend in evolution seems
to be that more and more complex body designs have emerged over
time. However, again, it is not as if the older designs are inefficient! So
many of the older and simpler designs still survive. In fact, one of the
simplest life forms — bacteria — inhabit the most inhospitable habitats
like hot springs, deep-sea thermal vents and the ice in Antarctica. In
other words, human beings are not the pinnacle of evolution, but simply
yet another species in the teeming spectrum of evolving life.

9.6.1 Human Evolution

The same tools for tracing evolutionary
relationships — excavating, time-dating
and studying fossils, as well as
determining DNA sequences — have
been used for studying human
evolution. There is a great diversity of
human forms and features across the
planet. So much so that, for a long time,
people used to talk about human
‘races’. Skin colour used to be the
commonest way of identifying these so-
called races. Some were called yellow,
some black, white or brown. A major question debated for a long time
was, have these apparent groups evolved differently? Over recent years,
the evidence has become very clear. The answer is that there is no
biological basis to the notion of human races. All humans are a single
species.

Not only that, regardless of where we have lived for the past few
thousand years, we all come from Africa. The earliest members of the
human species, Homo sapiens, can be traced there. Our genetic
footprints can be traced back to our African roots. A couple of hundred
thousand years ago, some of our ancestors left Africa while others stayed

Heredity and Evolution

Figure 9.14
Evolution —
Ladder versus Tree

157
