What happens when pea plants showing two different
characteristics, rather than just one, are bred with each other?
What do the progeny of a tall plant with round seeds and a short
plant with wrinkled-seeds look like? They are all tall and have
round seeds. Tallness and round seeds are thus dominant traits.
But what happens when these F1 progeny are used to generate
F2 progeny by self-pollination? A Mendelian experiment will find
that some F2 progeny are tall plants with round seeds, and some
were short plants with wrinkled seeds. However, there would
also be some F2 progeny that showed new mixtures. Some of
them would be tall, but have wrinkled seeds, while others would
be short, but have round seeds. Thus, the tall/short trait and
the round seed/wrinkled seed trait are independently inherited.
Another example is shown in Fig. 9.5.

9.2.3 How do these Traits get Expressed?

How does the mechanism of heredity work? Cellular DNA is
the information source for making proteins in the cell. A
section of DNA that provides information for one protein is
called the gene for that protein. How do proteins control the
characteristics that we are discussing here? Let us take the
example of tallness as a characteristic. We know that plants
have hormones that can trigger growth. Plant height can
thus depend on the amount of a particular plant hormone.
The amount of the plant hormone made will depend on the
efficiency of the process for making it. Consider now an
enzyme that is important for this process. If this enzyme
works efficiently, a lot of hormone will be made, and the
plant will be tall. Ifthe gene for that enzyme has an alteration
that makes the enzyme less efficient, the amount of hormone
will be less, and the plant will be short. Thus, genes control
characteristics, or traits.

If the interpretations of Mendelian experiments we have
been discussing are correct, then both parents must be
contributing equally to the DNA of the progeny during sexual
reproduction. We have disscussed this issue in the previous
Chapter. If both parents can help determine the trait in the
progeny, both parents must be contributing a copy of the same
gene. This means that each pea plant must have two sets of all
genes, one inherited from each parent. For this mechanism to
work, each germ cell must have only one gene set.

How do germ-cells make a single set of genes from the

| cross fertilisation

ny

J self fertilisation
waa “a €Qa EP
3: 1 Ratio

Figure 9.4

Oo « ©
RR yy rr YY
(round, green) (wrinkled, yellow)

t 4

ne J
On

Rr Yy
(round, yellow)

O «oO
Fl | Fl

315 round, yellow O 9

108 round, green

101 wrinkled, yetlow 3
1

32 wrinkled, green 1

556 seeds 6

Figure 9.5

Independent inheritance
of two separate traits,
shape and colour of seeds

normal two copies that all other cells in the body have? If progeny plants
inherited a single whole gene set from each parent, then the experiment
in Fig. 9.5 cannot work. This is because the two characteristics ‘R’ and
‘y’ would then be linked to each other and cannot be independently
inherited. This is explained by the fact that each gene set is present, not

Heredity and Evolution

145
