Hypothalamus

Parathyroid
glands

Thymus

Pancreas

Pineal gland
ineal glan Hypothalamus

Pituitary gland we Pituitary gland

Thyroid gland Thyroid gland

Parathyroid
glands

Thymus

Adrenal glands

Ovary

@)

Figure 7.7 Endocrine glands in human beings (a) male, (b) female

Let us examine some examples to understand how hormones help
in coordinated growth. We have all seen salt packets which say ‘iodised
salt’ or ‘enriched with iodine’. Why is it important for us to have iodised
salt in our diet? Iodine is necessary for the thyroid gland to make
thyroxin hormone. Thyroxin regulates carbohydrate, protein and fat
metabolism in the body so as to provide the best balance for growth.
Iodine is essential for the synthesis of thyroxin. In case iodine is deficient
in our diet, there is a possibility that we might suffer from goitre. One of
the symptoms in this disease is a swollen neck. Can you correlate this
with the position of the thyroid gland in Fig. 7.7?

Sometimes we come across people who are either very short (dwarfs)
or extremely tall (giants). Have you ever wondered how this happens?
Growth hormone is one of the hormones secreted by the pituitary. As its
name indicates, growth hormone regulates growth and development of
the body. If there is a deficiency of this hormone in childhood, it leads to
dwarfism.

You must have noticed many dramatic changes in your appearance
as well as that of your friends as you approached 10-12 years of age.
These changes associated with puberty are because of the secretion of
testosterone in males and oestrogen in females.

Do you know anyone in your family or friends who has been advised
by the doctor to take less sugar in their diet because they are suffering
from diabetes? As a treatment, they might be taking injections of insulin.
This is a hormone which is produced by the pancreas and helps in
regulating blood sugar levels. If it is not secreted in proper amounts, the
sugar level in the blood rises causing many harmful effects.

Science
