11.4 DISPERSION OF WHITE LIGHT BY A GLASS PRISM

You must have seen and appreciated the spectacular colours in a rainbow.
How could the white light of the Sun give us various colours of the
rainbow? Before we take up this question, we shall first go back to the
refraction of light through a prism. The inclined refracting surfaces of a
glass prism show exciting phenomenon. Let us find it out through an
activity.

Take a thick sheet of cardboard and make a small hole or narrow
slit in its middle.

Allow sunlight to fall on the narrow slit. This gives a narrow beam
of white light.

Now, take a glass prism and allow the light from the slit to fall on
one of its faces as shown in Fig. 11.5.

Turn the prism slowly until the light that comes out of it appears
on a nearby screen

What do you observe? You will find a beautiful band of colours.
Why does this happen?

The prism has probably split the incident
white light into a band of colours. Note the
colours that appear at the two ends of the
colour band. What is the sequence of colours
that you see on the screen? The various
colours seen are Violet, Indigo, Blue, Green,
Yellow, Orange and Red, as shown in
Fig. 11.5. The acronym VIBGYOR will help Woite Bent
you to remember the sequence of colours.

The band of the coloured components of a Glass prism

light beam is called its spectrum. You might Figure 11.5 Dispersion of white light by the glass prism
not be able to see all the colours separately.

Yet something makes each colour distinct from the other. The splitting

of light into its component colours is called dispersion.

You have seen that white light is dispersed into its seven-colour
components by a prism. Why do we get these colours? Different colours
of light bend through different angles with respect to the incident ray,
as they pass through a prism. The red light bends the least while the
violet the most. Thus the rays of each colour emerge along different
paths and thus become distinct. It is the band of distinct colours that
we see in a spectrum.

Isaac Newton was the first to use a glass A Screen
prism to obtain the spectrum of sunlight. He A
tried to split the colours of the spectrum of
white light further by using another similar
prism. However, he could not get any more
colours. He then placed a second identical \ P, A
prism in an inverted position with respect to
the first prism, as shown in Fig. 11.6. This

hye R
mn

ory

SPeo

~

White light

Figure 11.6 Recombination of the spectrum of white light

The Human Eye and the Colourful World 193
