Now write and balance the equation for the above reaction. Since
metallic oxides react with acids to give salts and water, similar to the
reaction of a base with an acid, metallic oxides are said to be basic oxides.

2.1.6 Reaction of a Non-metallic Oxide with Base

You saw the reaction between carbon dioxide and calcium hydroxide
(lime water) in Activity 2.5. Calcium hydroxide, which is a base, reacts
with carbon dioxide to produce a salt and water. Since this is similar to
the reaction between a base and an acid, we can conclude that non-
metallic oxides are acidic in nature.

Q U ES TION $

Why should curd and sour substances not be kept in brass and copper
vessels?
Which gas is usually liberated when an acid reacts with a metal?

Illustrate with an example. How will you test for the presence of
this gas?

Metal compound A reacts with dilute hydrochloric acid to produce
effervescence. The gas evolved extinguishes a burning candle. Write a
balanced chemical equation for the reaction if one of the compounds
formed is calcium chloride.

2.2 WHAT DO ALL ACIDS AND ALL BASES HAVE IN
COMMON?

In Section 2.1 we have seen that all acids have similar chemical
properties. What leads to this similarity in properties? We saw in Activity
2.3 that all acids generate hydrogen gas on reacting with metals, so
hydrogen seems to be common to all acids. Let us perform an Activity to
investigate whether all compounds containing hydrogen are acidic.

Activity 2.8
Bulb
6 volt battery —y iL (ye . Take solutions of glucose, alcohol,

7 — Switch hydrochloric acid, sulphuric acid, etc.

Fix two nails on a cork, and place the cork in
a 100 mL beaker.

Beaker Connect the nails to the two terminals of a
6 volt battery through a bulb and a switch, as
shown in Fig. 2.3.

Now pour some dilute HCl in the beaker and

Nail

Dilute HCl switch on the current.

solution Repeat with dilute sulphuric acid.

Rubber What do you observe?

cork : q

Repeat the experiment separately with

Figure 2.3 glucose and alcohol solutions. What do you
Acid solution in water observe now?
conducts electricity Does the bulb glow in all cases?

22 Science
