2. In Activity 13.7, how do we think the displacement of rod AB will be
affected if (i) current in rod AB is increased; (ii) a stronger horse-shoe
magnet is used; and (iii) length of the rod AB is increased?

3. A positively-charged particle (alpha-particle) projected towards west is
deflected towards north by a magnetic field. The direction of magnetic

field is

(a) towards south (b) towards east

(c) downward

(d) upward

Magnetism in medicine

An electric current always produces a magnetic field. Even weak ion currents that
travel along the nerve cells in our body produce magnetic fields. When we touch
something, our nerves carry an electric impulse to the muscles we need to use. This

impulse produces a temporary magnetic field. These fields are very weak and are about
one-billionth of the earth’s magnetic field. Two main organs in the human body where
the magnetic field produced is significant, are the heart and the brain. The magnetic field
inside the body forms the basis of obtaining the images of different body parts. This is
done using a technique called Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI). Analysis of these
images helps in medical diagnosis. Magnetism has, thus, got important uses in medicine.

Split rings
(P and Q)

Figure 13.15
A simple electric motor

13.4 ELECTRIC MOTOR

An electric motor is a rotating device that converts electrical energy to
mechanical energy. Electric motor is used as an important component
in electric fans, refrigerators, mixers, washing machines, computers, MP3
players etc. Do you know how an electric motor works?

An electric motor, as shown in Fig. 13.15, consists of a rectangular
coil ABCD of insulated copper wire. The coil is placed between the two
poles of a magnetic field such that the arm AB and CD are perpendicular

Brushes
(X and Y)

to the direction of the magnetic field. The
ends of the coil are connected to the two
halves P and Q of a split ring. The inner sides
of these halves are insulated and attached
to an axle. The external conducting edges of
P and Q touch two conducting stationary
brushes X and Y, respectively, as shown in
the Fig. 13.15.

Current in the coil ABCD enters from the
source battery through conducting brush
xX and flows back to the battery through
brush Y. Notice that the current in arm AB
of the coil flows from A to B. In arm CD it
flows from C to D, that is, opposite to the
direction of current through arm AB. On
applying Fleming’s left hand rule for the
direction of force on a current-carrying

Science
