(b) Hypermetropia
Hypermetropia is also known as far-sightedness. A
person with hypermetropia can see distant objects
clearly but cannot see nearby objects distinctly. The
near point, for the person, is farther away from the
(a) Near point of a Hypermetropic eye normal near point (25 cm). Such a person has to keep
a reading material much beyond 25 cm from the eye
for comfortable reading. This is because the light rays
from a closeby object are focussed at a point behind
the retina as shown in Fig. 11.3 (b). This defect arises
either because (i) the focal length of the eye lens is too
(b) Hypermetropic eye long, or (ii) the eyeball has become too small. This defect
can be corrected by using a convex lens of appropriate
power. This is illustrated in Fig. 11.3 (c). Eye-glasses
with converging lenses provide the additional focussing
power required for forming the image on the retina.

(c) Correction for Hypermetropic eye (c) Presbyopia
Figure 11.3 The power of accommodation of the eye usually
(a), (b) The hypermetropic eye, and (c) correction decreases with ageing. For most people, the near point
for hypermetropia gradually recedes away. They find it difficult to see

nearby objects comfortably and distinctly without
corrective eye-glasses. This defect is called Presbyopia. It arises
due to the gradual weakening of the ciliary muscles and diminishing
flexibility of the eye lens. Sometimes, a person may suffer from
both myopia and hypermetropia. Such people often require bi-
focal lenses. A common type of bi-focal lenses consists of both
concave and convex lenses. The upper portion consists of a concave
lens. It facilitates distant vision. The lower part is a convex lens. It
facilitates near vision.
These days, it is possible to correct the refractive defects with
contact lenses or through surgical interventions.

OQ U ES TION S$

What is meant by power of accommodation of the eye?

A person with a myopic eye cannot see objects beyond 1.2 m distinctly.
What should be the type of the corrective lens used to restore proper
vision?

What is the far point and near point of the human eye with normal
vision?

A student has difficulty reading the blackboard while sitting in the last
row. What could be the defect the child is suffering from? How can it be
corrected?

190 Science
