Fix a sheet of white paper on a drawing board using drawing pins.
Place a rectangular glass slab over the sheet in the middle.
Draw the outline of the slab with a pencil. Let us name the outline
as ABCD.

Take four identical pins.

Fix two pins, say E and F, vertically such that the line joining the
pins is inclined to the edge AB.

Look for the images of the pins E and F through the opposite edge.
Fix two other pins, say G and H, such that these pins and the
images of E and F lie on a straight line.

Remove the pins and the slab.

Join the positions of tip of the pins E and F and produce the line
up to AB. Let EF meet AB at O. Similarly, join the positions of tip
of the pins G and H and produce it up to the edge CD. Let HG
meet CD at O%

Join O and O’”. Also produce EF up to P, as shown by a dotted line

in Fig. 10.10.

In this Activity, you will note, the light ray has changed its direction
at points O and O”% Note that both the points O and O’ lie on surfaces
separating two transparent media. Draw a perpendicular NN’ to AB at O
and another perpendicular MM’ to CD at 0” The light ray at point O has
entered from a rarer medium to a denser medium, that is, from air to

glass. Note that the light ray has bent towards
the normal. At O% the light ray has entered
from glass to air, that is, from a denser
medium to a rarer medium. The light here
has bent away from the normal. Compare the
angle of incidence with the angle of refraction
at both refracting surfaces AB and CD.

In Fig. 10.10, EO is the incident ray, OO’
is the refracted ray and O’H is the emergent
ray. You may observe that the emergent ray
is parallel to the direction of the incident ray.
Why does it happen so? The extent of bending
of the ray of light at the opposite parallel faces
AB (air-glass interface) and CD (glass-air
interface) of the rectangular glass slab is
equal and opposite. This is why the ray
emerges parallel to the incident ray. However,
the light ray is shifted sideward slightly. What
happens when a light ray is incident
normally to the interface of two media? Try
and find out.

Glass

Glass-—
slab

Figure 10.10
Refraction of light through a rectangular glass slab

Now you are familiar with the refraction of light. Refraction is due to
change in the speed of light as it enters from one transparent medium to
another. Experiments show that refraction of light occurs according to

certain laws.

Light - Reflection and Refraction

173
