with other elements such as halogens, oxygen, nitrogen and sulphur. In
a hydrocarbon chain, one or more hydrogens can be replaced by these
elements, such that the valency of carbon remains satisfied. In such
compounds, the element replacing hydrogen is referred to as a

heteroatom. These

Table 4.3 Some functional groups in carbon compounds heteroatoms confer
specific properties to the
Hetero Functional Formula of compound, regardless
atom group functional group of the length and nature
of the carbon chain and
Cl/Br Halo- (Chloro/bromo) —cl, —Br hence are called
(substitutes for functional groups.
hydrogen atom) Some important
functional groups are
Oxygen 1. Alcohol oH given in the Table 4.3.
H Free valency’ or
4 valencies of the group
2. Aldehyde mn are shown by the single
@ line. The functional
-c- group is attached to the
3. Ketone I carbon chain through
oO this valency by
O replacing one hydrogen
4. Carboxylic acid _ o- OH atom or atoms.

66

4.2.4 Homologous Series

You have seen that carbon atoms can be linked together to form chains
of varying lengths. In addition, hydrogen atom or atoms on these carbon
chains can be replaced by any of the functional groups that we saw
above. The presence of a functional group such as alcohol dictates the
properties of the carbon compound, regardless of the length of the carbon
chain. For example, the chemical properties of CH,OH, C,H,OH, C,H,OH
and C,H,OH are all very similar. Hence, such a series of compounds in
which the same functional group substitutes for hydrogen in a carbon
chain is called a homologous series.

Let us look at the homologous series that we saw earlier in Table
4.2. If we look at the formulae of successive compounds, say —

CH, and C,H, — . these differ by a -CH,- unit
C,H, and C,H, — . these differ by a -CH,- unit

What is the difference between the next pair— propane and butane (C,H,,)?

Can you find out the difference in molecular masses between these
pairs (the atomic mass of carbon is 12 u and the atomic mass of hydrogen
is 1 u)?

Similarly, take the homologous series for alkenes. The first member
of the series is ethene which we have already come across in
Section 4.2.1. What is the formula for ethene? The succeeding members
have the formula C,H,, C,H, and C,H,,. Do these also differ by a -CH,—

3°"6’

Science
