Elements are classified on the basis of similarities in their properties.

Débereiner grouped the elements into triads and Newlands gave the Law of Octaves.
Mendeléev arranged the elements in increasing order of their atomic masses and
according to their chemical properties.

Mendeléev even predicted the existence of some yet to be discovered elements on
the basis of gaps in his Periodic Table.

Anomalies in arrangement of elements based on increasing atomic mass could be

removed when the elements were arranged in order of increasing atomic number,
a fundamental property of the element discovered by Moseley.

Elements in the Modern Periodic Table are arranged in 18 vertical columns called
groups and 7 horizontal rows called periods.

Elements thus arranged show periodicity of properties including atomic size,
valency or combining capacity and metallic and non-metallic character.

1. Which of the following statements is not a correct statement about the trends when
going from left to right across the periods of periodic Table.
(a) The elements become less metallic in nature.
(b) The number of valence electrons increases.
(c) The atoms lose their electrons more easily.
(d) The oxides become more acidic.

2. Element X forms a chloride with the formula XCl,, which is a solid with a high
melting point. X would most likely be in the same group of the Periodic Table as
(a) Na (b) Mg (c) Al (d) Si

3. Which element has
(a) two shells, both of which are completely filled with electrons?
(b) the electronic configuration 2, 8, 2?
(c) a total of three shells, with four electrons in its valence shell?
(d) a total of two shells, with three electrons in its valence shell?
(e) twice as many electrons in its second shell as in its first shell?

4. (a) What property do all elements in the same column of the Periodic Table as
boron have in common?
(b) What property do all elements in the same column of the Periodic Table as
fluorine have in common?

5. Anatom has electronic configuration 2, 8, 7.
(a) What is the atomic number of this element?
(b) To which of the following elements would it be chemically similar?
(Atomic numbers are given in parentheses.)
N(7) F(9) P(15) Ar(18)

Periodic Classification of Elements 91
