The following are the laws of refraction of light.

(i) The incident ray, the refracted ray and the normal to the
interface of two transparent media at the point of incidence, all
lie in the same plane.

(ii) The ratio of sine of angle of incidence to the sine of angle of
refraction is a constant, for the light of a given colour and for
the given pair of media. This law is also known as Snell's law of
refraction.

If iis the angle of incidence and ris the angle of refraction, then,

This constant value is called the refractive index of the second medium
with respect to the first. Let us study about refractive index in some detail.

10.3.2 The Refractive Index

You have already studied that a ray of light that travels obliquely from
one transparent medium into another will change its direction in the
second medium. The extent of the change in direction that takes place
in a given pair of media is expressed in terms of the refractive index, the
“constant” appearing on the right-hand side of Eq.(10.4).

The refractive index can be linked to an important physical quantity,
the relative speed of propagation of light in different media. It turns out
that light propagates with different speeds in different media. Light travels
the fastest in vacuum with the highest speed of 3x10° ms‘. In air, the
speed of light is only marginally less, compared to that in vacuum. It
reduces considerably in glass or water. The value of the refractive index
for a given pair of media depends upon the speed of light in the two
media, as given below.

Consider a ray of light travelling from medium 1 into medium 2, as
shown in Fig.10.11. Let v, be the speed of light in medium 1 and v, be
the speed of light in medium 2. The refractive index of medium 2 with
respect to medium 1 is given by the ratio of the speed of light in medium
1 and the speed of light in medium 2. This is usually represented by the
symbol n,,. This can be expressed in an equation form as

B

Medium 1

(Air)

Medium 2 . . .

(Glass) By the same argument, the refractive index of medium
1 with respect to medium 2 is represented as n,,. It is given
by

Figure 10.11

174

If medium 1 is vacuum or air, then the refractive index of medium 2
is considered with respect to vacuum. This is called the absolute refractive
index of the medium. It is simply represented as n.,. If c is the speed of

Science
