88

How many elements are there in the first, second, third and fourth
periods?

We can explain the number of elements in these periods based on
how electrons are filled into various shells. You will study the details of
this in higher classes. Recall that the maximum number of electrons
that can be accommodated in a shell depends on the formula 2n? where
‘n’ is the number of the given shell from the nucleus.

For example,

KShell - 2 x (1)? =2, hence the first period has 2 elements.

LShell - 2 x (2)? =8, hence the second period has 8 elements.

MShell - 2 x (8)? = 18, but the outermost shell can have only
8 electrons, so the third period also has only 8 elements.

The position of an element in the Periodic Table tells us about its
chemical reactivity. As you have learnt, the valence electrons determine
the kind and number of bonds formed by an element. Can you now say
why Mendeléev’s choice of formulae of compounds as the basis for
deciding the position of an element in his Table was a good one? How
would this lead to elements with similar chemical properties being placed
in the same group?

5.3.2 Trends in the Modern Periodic Table

Valency : As you know, the valency of an element is determined by the
number of valence electrons present in the outermost shell of its atom.

How do you calculate the valency of an element from its electronic
configuration?

What is the valency of magnesium with atomic number 12 and
sulphur with atomic number 16?

Similarly find out the valencies of the first twenty elements.
How does the valency vary in a period on going from left to right?
How does the valency vary in going down a group?

Atomic size: The term atomic size refers to the radius of an atom. The
atomic size may be visualised as the distance between the centre of the
nucleus and the outermost shell of an isolated atom. The atomic radius
of hydrogen atom is 37 pm (picometre, 1 pm = 1071?m).

Let us study the variation of atomic size in a group and in a period.

Atomic radii of the elements of the second period are given below:
Period II elements : B Be O N Li C
Atomic radius (pm) : 88 111 66 74 152 77
Arrange them in decreasing order of their atomic radii.

Are the elements now arranged in the pattern of a period in the
Periodic Table?

Which elements have the largest and the smallest atoms?

How does the atomic radius change as you go from left to right in
a period?

Science
