Organic compounds
The two characteristic features seen in carbon, that is, tetravalency and catenation, put
together give rise to a large number of compounds. Many have the same non-carbon
atom or group of atoms attached to different carbon chains. These compounds were

initially extracted from natural substances and it was thought that these carbon
compounds or organic compounds could only be formed within a living system. That is,
it was postulated that a ‘vital force’ was necessary for their synthesis. Friedrich Wohler
disproved this in 1828 by preparing urea from ammonium cyanate. But carbon
compounds, except for oxides of carbon, carbonate and hydrogencarbonate salts continue
to be studied under organic chemistry.

4.2.1 Saturated and Unsaturated Carbon Compounds

We have already seen the structure of methane. Another compound
formed between carbon and hydrogen is ethane with a formula of C,H,.
In order to arrive at the structure of simple carbon
compounds, the first step is to link the carbon atoms
together with a single bond (Fig. 4.6a) and then use the
hydrogen atoms to satisfy the remaining valencies of carbon
(Fig. 4.6b). For example, the structure of ethane is arrived
in the following steps —

C—C Step 1
Figure 4.6 (a) Carbon atoms linked together with a single bond

Three valencies of each carbon atom remain unsatisfied,

so each is bonded to three hydrogen atoms giving: Figure 4.6
(c) Electron dot structure of
Hi Hi ethane
H-C “ec ~H Step 2
H H

Figure 4.6 (b) Each carbon atom bonded to three hydrogen atoms
The electron dot structure of ethane is shown in Fig. 4.6(c).

Can you draw the structure of propane, which has the molecular cC—Cc Step 1
formula C,H, in a similar manner? You will see that the valencies of all
the atoms are satisfied by single bonds between them. Such carbon
compounds are called saturated compounds. These compounds are

: H H

normally not very reactive.

However, another compound of carbon and hydrogen has the formula Cc- CL
C,H, and is called ethene. How can this molecule be depicted? We follow H H Step 2
the same step-wise approach as above.

Each carbon atom gets two hydrogen atoms to give — HW HW

We see that one valency per carbon atom remains unsatisfied. This Noe ae
can be satisfied only if there is a double bond between the two carbons oN Steps
giving us — H H

Carbon and its Compounds 63
