starlight entering the eye flickers — the star sometimes appears brighter,
and at some other time, fainter, which is the twinkling effect.

Why don’t the planets twinkle? The planets are much closer to the
earth, and are thus seen as extended sources. If we consider a planet as
a collection of a large number of point-sized sources of light, the total
variation in the amount of light entering our eye from all the individual
point-sized sources will average out to zero, thereby
nullifying the twinkling effect.

Advance sunrise and delayed sunset

The Sun is visible to us about 2 minutes before the

actual sunrise, and about 2 minutes after the actual Q. oo poet
sunrise, we mean the actual crossing of the horizon by

the Sun. Fig. 11.10 shows the actual and apparent f
positions of the Sun with respect to the horizon. The

time difference between actual sunset and the apparent

sunset is about 2 minutes. The apparent flattening of

the Sun’s disc at sunrise and sunset is also due to the

sunset because of atmospheric refraction. By actual “a en
4 y . Nyt

Same phenomenon. Atmosphere

11.6 SCATTERING OF LIGHT

The interplay of light with objects around us gives rise to several
spectacular phenomena in nature. The blue colour of the sky, colour of
water in deep sea, the reddening of the sun at sunrise and the sunset
are some of the wonderful phenomena we are familiar with. In the previous
class, you have learnt about the scattering of light by colloidal particles.
The path of a beam of light passing through a true solution is not visible.
However, its path becomes visible through a colloidal solution where the
size of the particles is relatively larger.

11.6.1 Tyndall Effect

The earth’s atmosphere is a heterogeneous mixture of minute particles.
These particles include smoke, tiny water droplets, suspended particles
of dust and molecules of air. When a beam of light strikes such fine
particles, the path of the beam becomes visible. The light reaches us,
after being reflected diffusely by these particles. The phenomenon of
scattering of light by the colloidal particles gives rise to Tyndall effect
which you have studied in Class [X. This phenomenon is seen when a
fine beam of sunlight enters a smoke-filled room through a small hole.
Thus, scattering of light makes the particles visible. Tyndall effect can
also be observed when sunlight passes through a canopy of a dense
forest. Here, tiny water droplets in the mist scatter light.

The colour of the scattered light depends on the size of the
scattering particles. Very fine particles scatter mainly blue light while
particles of larger size scatter light of longer wavelengths. If the size
of the scattering particles is large enough, then, the scattered light may
even appear white.

The Human Eye and the Colourful World

Apparent position u
of the Sun a

- 7

“

oy

Figure 11.10
Atmospheric refraction
effects at sunrise and
sunset

195
