262

15.3.1 Ozone Layer and How it is Getting Depleted

Ozone (O,) is a molecule formed by three atoms of oxygen. While O,,
which we normally refer to as oxygen, is essential for all aerobic forms of
life. Ozone, is a deadly poison. However, at the higher levels of the
atmosphere, ozone performs an essential function. It shields the surface
of the earth from ultraviolet (UV) radiation from the Sun. This radiation
is highly damaging to organisms, for example, it is known to cause skin
cancer in human beings.

Ozone at the higher levels of the atmosphere is a product of UV
radiation acting on oxygen (O,) molecule. The higher energy UV
radiations split apart some moleculer oxygen (O,) into free oxygen (O)
atoms. These atoms then combine with the molecular oxygen to form
ozone as shown—

O, —~>0+0

0+0, 30,

(Ozone)

The amount of ozone in the atmosphere began to drop sharply in
the 1980s. This decrease has been linked to synthetic chemicals like
chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) which are used as refrigerants and in fire
extinguishers. In 1987, the United Nations Environment Programme
(UNEP) succeeded in forging an agreement to freeze CFC production at
1986 levels.

Activity 15.6

Find out from the library, internet or newspaper reports, which
chemicals are responsible for the depletion of the ozone layer.
Find out if the regulations put in place to control the emission of
these chemicals have succeeded in reducing the damage to the
ozone layer. Has the size of the hole in the ozone layer changed in
recent years?

15.3.2 Managing the Garbage we Produce

Visit any town or city, and we are sure to find heaps of garbage all over
the place. Visit any place of tourist interest and we are sure to find the
place littered with empty food wrappers. In the earlier classes we have
talked about this problem of dealing with the garbage that we generate.
Let us now look at the problem a bit more deeply.

Activity 15.7

Find out what happens to the waste generated at home. Is there a
system in place to collect this waste?

Find out how the local body (panchayat, municipal corporation,
resident welfare association) deals with the waste. Are there
mechanisms in place to treat the biodegradable and non-
biodegradable wastes separately?

Science
