You will see in the above Activity that the nature, position and size of
the image formed by a concave mirror depends on the position of the
object in relation to points P, F and C. The image formed is real for some
positions of the object. It is found to be a virtual image for a certain other
position. The image is either magnified, reduced or has the same size,
depending on the position of the object. A summary of these observations
is given for your reference in Table 10.1.

Table 10.1 Image formation by a concave mirror for different positions of the object

Position of the Position of the Size of the Nature of the
object image image image

At infinity

Beyond C

AtC

Between C and F
At F

Between P and F

164

At the focus F Highly diminished, Real and inverted
point-sized

Between F and C Diminished Real and inverted

AtC Same size Real and inverted

Beyond C Enlarged Real and inverted

At infinity Highly enlarged Real and inverted

Behind the mirror Enlarged Virtual and erect

10.2.2 Representation of Images Formed by Spherical
Mirrors Using Ray Diagrams

We can also study the formation of images by spherical mirrors by
drawing ray diagrams. Consider an extended object, of finite size, placed
in front of a spherical mirror. Each small portion of the extended object
acts like a point source. An infinite number of rays originate from each
of these points. To construct the ray diagrams, in order to locate the
image of an object, an arbitrarily large number of rays emanating from a
point could be considered. However, it is more convenient to consider
only two rays, for the sake of clarity of the ray diagram. These rays are
so chosen that it is easy to know their directions after reflection from the
mirror.

The intersection of at least two reflected rays give the position of image
of the point object. Any two of the following rays can be considered for
locating the image.

(i) A ray parallel to the
principal axis, after
reflection, will pass through
the principal focus in case of
a concave mirror or appear
to diverge from the principal
focus in case of a convex
mirror. This is illustrated in

Science
