Mendel was educated in a monastery and went on to study science and
mathematics at the University of Vienna. Failure in the examinations for a
teaching certificate did not suppress his zeal for scientific quest. He went
back to his monastery and started growing peas. Many others had studied
the inheritance of traits in peas and other organisms earlier, but Mendel
blended his knowledge of science and mathematics and was the first one
to keep count of individuals exhibiting a particular trait in each generation.
This helped him to arrive at the laws of inheritance that we have discussed

in the main text.

Mendel used a number of contrasting visible characters of garden
peas — round/wrinkled seeds, tall/short plants, white/violet flowers and
so on. He took pea plants with different characteristics — a tall plant and
a short plant, produced progeny from them, and calculated the
percentages of tall or short progeny.

In the first place, there were no halfway characteristics in this first-
generation, or F1 progeny — no ‘medium-height’ plants. All plants were
tall. This meant that only one of the parental traits

Fl
was seen, not some mixture of the two. So the next
question was, were the tall plants in the Fl
generation exactly the same as the tall plants of the
parent generation? Mendelian experiments test this
by getting both the parental plants and these F1 tall
plants to reproduce by self-pollination. The progeny
of the parental plants are, of course, all tall. However,
ty x at All tans the second-generation, or F2, progeny of the F1 tall
plants are not all tall. Instead, one quarter of them
Rix Fl Fa are short. This indicates that both the tallness and
shortness traits were inherited in the F1 plants, but
only the tallness trait was expressed. Thus, two
copies of the trait are inherited in each sexually
reproducing organism. These two may be identical,
or may be different, depending on the parentage. A
pattern of inheritance can be worked out with this
Tall x Tall Tall Tall Tall Short . . .
ry) (rt) aT ( dy ty | assumption, as shown in Fig. 9.3.
Figure 9.3
Inheritance of traits
over two generations

144

In Fig. 9.3, what experiment would we do to confirm that the F2
generation did in fact have a 1:2:1 ratio of TT, Tt and tt trait
combinations?

In this explanation, both TT and Tt are tall plants, while only ttisa
short plant. In other words, a single copy of ‘T is enough to make the
plant tall, while both copies have to be ‘t for the plant to be short. Traits
like ‘T’ are called dominant traits, while those that behave like ‘t’ are
called recessive traits. Work out which trait would be considered
dominant and which one recessive in Fig. 9.4.

Science
