This activity demonstrates the effect of soap in cleaning. Most dirt is
oily in nature and as you know, oil does not dissolve in water. The
molecules of soap are sodium or potassium salts of long-chain carboxylic
acids. The ionic-end of soap dissolves in water while the carbon chain
dissolves in oil. The soap molecules, thus form structures called micelles
(see Fig. 4.12) where one end of the molecules is towards the oil droplet
while the ionic-end faces outside. This forms an emulsion in water. The
soap micelle thus helps in dissolving the dirt in water and we can wash
our clothes clean (Fig. 4.13).

Can you draw the structure of the micelle that would be formed if
you dissolve soap in a hydrocarbon?

Micelles
Soaps are molecules in which the two ends have differing properties, one is hydrophilic,
that is, it dissolves in water, while the other end is hydrophobic, that is, it dissolves in
hydrocarbons. When soap is at the surface of water, the hydrophobic ‘tail’ of soap will
not be soluble in water and the soap will align along the surface of water with the
ionic end in water and the hydrocarbon ‘tail’ protruding out of water. Inside water,

Hydrophilic end Hydrophobic end
~~, -_—
o~ YYYYYYS Soap molecule

Hydrophilic end
Hydrophobic end

Ny)

AS \ 7?
Va wy 8
Ca) - -
=>
a these molecules have a unique orientation that keeps
the hydrocarbon portion out of the water. This is
=) achieved by forming clusters of molecules in which
-_ eo the hydrophobic tails are in the interior of the cluster
and the ionic ends are on the surface of the cluster.
This formation is called a micelle. Soap in the form of
go 3 micelle is able to clean, since the oily dirt will be
an S collected in the centre of the micelle. The micelles stay
™ in solution as a colloid and will not come together to
= precipitate because of ion-ion repulsion. Thus, the
2 =_ X

dirt suspended in the micelles is also easily rinsed

fo away. The soap micelles are large enough to scatter

light. Hence a soap solution appears cloudy.

Figure 4.13 Effect of soap in cleaning

Carbon and its Compounds 75
