Alcohol as a fuel
Sugarcane plants are one of the most efficient convertors of sunlight into chemical
energy. Sugarcane juice can be used to prepare molasses which is fermented to give
alcohol (ethanol). Some countries now use alcohol as an additive in petrol since itis a
cleaner fuel which gives rise to only carbon dioxide and water on burning in sufficient

air (oxygen).

4.4.2 Properties of Ethanoic Acid

Ethanoic acid is commonly called acetic acid and
belongs to a group of acids called carboxylic
acids. 5-8% solution of acetic acid in water is
called vinegar and is used widely as a preservative
in pickles. The melting point of pure ethanoic acid
is 290 K and hence it often freezes during winter
in cold climates. This gave rise to its name glacial
acetic acid.

The group of organic compounds called
carboxylic acids are obviously characterised by a
special acidity. However, unlike mineral acids like
HCl, which are completely ionised, carboxylic
acids are weak acids.

Take 1 mL ethanol (absolute alcohol)
and 1 mL glacial acetic acid along
with a few drops of concentrated
sulphuric acid in a test tube.
Warm in a water-bath for at least five
minutes as shown in Fig. 4.11.
Pour into a beaker containing
20-50 mL of water and smell the
resulting mixture.

Reactions of ethanoic acid:

Test tube ———
containing

reaction
mixture

Water

(i) Esterification reaction: Esters are most commonly
formed by reaction of an acid and an alcohol.
Ethanoic acid reacts with absolute ethanol in the

presence of an acid catalyst to give an ester —

Compare the pH of dilute acetic acid
and dilute hydrochloric acid using
both litmus paper and universal
indicator.

Are both acids indicated by the
litmus test?

Does the universal indicator show
them as equally strong acids?

Beaker

Wire gauze
Tripod stand

Burner

Figure 4.11
Formation of ester

Esters are sweet-smelling substances. These are used in making
perfumes and as flavouring agents. Esters react in the presence of
an acid or a base to give back the alcohol and carboxylic acid. This
reaction is known as saponification because it is used in the

preparation of soap.

Carbon and its Compounds

73
