‘complete alienation of the people from the administration’, resulting in
frequent clashes between forest officials and villagers. Forest and land
related conflicts in the region were also a major factor in fuelling the
militant peasant movements led by the Naxalites.

Accordingly, the Department changed its strategy, making a
beginning in the Arabari forest range of Midnapore district. Here, at the
instance of a.far-seeing forest officer, A.K. Banerjee, villagers were involved
in the protection of 1,272 hectares of badiy degraded sal forest. In return

for help in protection, villagers were given employment in both silviculture

and harvesting operations, 25 per cent of the final harvest, and allowed
fueltvood and fodder collection on payment of a nominal fee. With the
active and willing participation of the local community, the sal forests of
Arabari underwent a remarkable recovery — by 1983, a previously
worthless forest was valued Rs 12.5 crores.

Activity 16.7

Debate the damage caused to forests by the following —

(a) Building rest houses for tourists in national parks.

(b) Grazing domestic animals in national parks.

(c) Tourists throwing plastic bottles/covers and other litter in
national parks.

Q U ES TION §$

Why should we conserve forests and wildlife?

Suggest some approaches towards the conservation of forests.

16.3 WATER FOR ALL
Activity 16.8

Villages suffering from chronic water shortage surround a water
theme park in Maharashtra. Debate whether this is the optimum
use of the available water.

Water is a basic necessity for all terrestrial forms of life. We studied in
Class IX about the importance of water as a resource, the water cycle
and how human intervention pollutes water bodies. However, human
intervention also changes the availability of water in various regions.

Activity 16.9

Study the rainfall patterns in India from an atlas.
Identify the regions where water is abundant and the regions of
water scarcity.

Management of Natural Resources 2
