Explain different ways to induce current in a coil.

13.6 ELECTRIC GENERATOR

Based on the phenomenon of electromagnetic induction, the experiments
studied above generate induced current, which is usually very small.
This principle is also employed to produce large currents for use in homes
and industry. In an electric generator, mechanical energy is used to rotate
a conductor in a magnetic field to produce electricity.

An electric generator as shown in Fig. 13.19, consists of a rotating
rectangular coil ABCD placed between the two poles of a permanent
magnet. The two ends of this coil are connected to
the two rings R, and R,. The inner side of these
rings are made insulated. The two conducting
stationary brushes B, and B, are kept pressed
separately on the rings R, and R,, respectively. The
two rings R, and R, are internally attached to an
axle. The axle may be mechanically rotated from
outside to rotate the coil inside the magnetic field.

Rings
(R vand Rg) Outer ends of the two brushes are connected to
the galvanometer to show the flow of current in the

f given external circuit.

When the axle attached to the two rings is
rotated such that the arm AB moves up (and the
Figure 13.19 arm CD moves down) in the magnetic field produced
Mlustration of the by the permanent magnet. Let us say the coil ABCD
principle of electric is rotated clockwise in the arrangement shown in Fig. 13.19. By applying
generator Fleming’s right-hand rule, the induced currents are set up in these arms

along the directions AB and CD. Thus an induced current flows in the
direction ABCD. If there are larger numbers of turns in the coil, the current
generated in each turn adds up to give a large current through the coil.
This means that the current in the external circuit flows from B, to B,.

After halfa rotation, arm CD starts moving up and AB moving down.
As a result, the directions of the induced currents in both the arms
change, giving rise to the net induced current in the direction DCBA.
The current in the external circuit now flows from B, to B,. Thus after
every half rotation the polarity of the current in the respective arms
changes. Such a current, which changes direction after equal intervals
of time, is called an alternating current (abbreviated as AC). This device
is called an AC generator.

To get a direct current (DC, which does not change its direction with
time), a split-ring type commutator must be used. With this arrangement,
one brush is at all times in contact with the arm moving up in the field,
while the other is in contact with the arm moving down. We have seen
the working of a split ring commutator in the case of an electric motor

Science
