Figure 11.7
Rainbow in the sky

Raindrop

Sunlight

Violet

allowed all the colours of the spectrum to pass through the
second prism. He found a beam of white light emerging from the
other side of the second prism. This observation gave Newton
the idea that the sunlight is made up of seven colours.

Any light that gives a spectrum similar to that of sunlight is
often referred to as white light.

Arainbow is a natural spectrum appearing in the sky after a
rain shower (Fig. 11.7). It is caused by dispersion of sunlight by
tiny water droplets, present in the atmosphere. A rainbow is
always formed in a direction opposite to that of the Sun. The
water droplets act like small prisms. They refract and disperse
the incident sunlight, then reflect it internally, and finally refract
it again when it comes out of the raindrop (Fig. 11.8). Due to the
dispersion of light and internal reflection, different colours reach
the observer's eye.

You can also see a rainbow on a sunny day when you look at
the sky through a waterfall or through a water fountain, with the
Sun behind you.

11.5 ATMOSPHERIC REFRACTION

You might have observed the apparent random wavering or

flickering of objects seen through a turbulent stream of hot air rising

above a fire or a radiator. The air just above the fire becomes hotter than
the air further up. The hotter air is lighter (less dense) than the cooler air
above it, and has a refractive index slightly less than that of the cooler
air. Since the physical conditions of the refracting medium (air) are not
stationary, the apparent position of the object, as seen through the hot
air, fluctuates. This wavering is thus an effect of atmospheric refraction
(refraction of light by the earth’s atmosphere) on a small scale in our
local environment. The twinkling of stars is a similar phenomenon ona
much larger scale. Let us see how we can explain it.

Figure 11.8
Rainbow formation
Apparent
Star * star position

Ray path

Refractive index
increasing

Figure 11.9
Apparent star position
due to atmospheric
refraction

194

Twinkling of stars

The twinkling of a star is due to atmospheric refraction of
starlight. The starlight, on entering the earth’s atmosphere,
undergoes refraction continuously before it reaches the earth.
The atmospheric refraction occurs in a medium of gradually
changing refractive index. Since the atmosphere bends
starlight towards the normal, the apparent position of the
star is slightly different from its actual position. The star
appears slightly higher (above) than its actual position when
viewed near the horizon (Fig. 11.9). Further, this apparent
position of the star is not stationary, but keeps on changing
slightly, since the physical conditions of the earth’s
atmosphere are not stationary, as was the case in the
previous paragraph. Since the stars are very distant, they
approximate point-sized sources of light. As the path of rays
of light coming from the star goes on varying slightly, the
apparent position of the star fluctuates and the amount of

Science
